.\" Copyright (c) 2013-2014 Sougata Santra / Tuxera Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Erik Larsson / Tuxera Inc.
.\"
.TH FATDUMP 8 "June 2013" "Tuxera TFATprogs 3014.9.11"
.SH NAME
fatdump \- Efficiently dump the contents of a FAT volume.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fatdump
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice|image\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fatdump
will efficiently extract all relevant metadata and (optionally) data from an
FAT volume and dump it to standard output.
It works at disk sector level and copies only the used data. Unused disk space
becomes zero.

.B fatdump
can be useful to make backups, an exact snapshot of a FAT filesystem to
restore later on, or for developers to troubleshoot/investigate users' issues
using the clone without the risk of destroying the original filesystem.
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that
.B fatdump
accepts.  Nearly all options have two equivalent names.  The short name is
preceded by
.B \-
and the long name is preceded by
.B \-\- .
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-metadata\fR
Clone
.B ONLY METADATA
(for FAT experts). A metadata dump contains all of the FAT volume structures
but none of the user data, i.e. all file content will be omitted but the
directory structure will be preserved. The output from this command will be
relatively small if compressed.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-ntfsclone-image\fR
Emit an ntfsclone packed image (special image format) as output. This saves
space since all the non-allocated regions (and in the case of '\-m'
/'\-\-metadata' all the non-metadata regions) will not be written out
explicitly, but instead marked as a 'hole' in the image.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Suppress non-error output on stderr.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-force\fR
Force a clone, ignoring errors from cluster accounting.
.SH EXIT CODES
The exit code is 0 on success, non\-zero otherwise.
.SH EXAMPLES
Dump FAT file system on /dev/sda1 to a compressed metadata image:
.RS
.sp
.B fatdump /dev/sda1 | bzip2 > sda1.img.bz2
.sp
.RE
Dump FAT file system metadata on /dev/sda1 to a compressed metadata image:
.RS
.sp
.B fatdump \-m /dev/sda1 | bzip2 > sda1.img.bz2
.sp
.RE
Dump a FAT volume to a remote host, using ssh. Please note that ssh may ask
for a password!
.RS
.sp
.B fatdump /dev/sda1 | bzip2 | ssh host 'cat > sda1.img.bzip2'
.sp
.RE
.SH KNOWN ISSUES
There are no known problems with
.BR fatdump .
If you think you have found a problem then please send an email describing it
to fat-support@tuxera.com.
.hy
.SH AUTHORS
.B fatdump
was written by Sougata Santra, Tuxera Inc.
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B fatdump
is part of the
.B Tuxera FAT
package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fatdebug (8)
