.TH "xl2tpd.conf" "5" "" "Jean-Francois Dive" ""
.SH "NAME"
xl2tpd.conf \- L2TPD configuration file
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The xl2tpd.conf file contains configuration information for xl2tpd, the implementation of l2tp protocol.

The configuration file is composed of sections and parameters. Each section
has a given name which will be used when using the configuration FIFO 
(normaly /var/run/l2tp\-control). See xl2tpd.8  for more details.

The specific given name 
.B default
will specify parameters applicables for all the following sections.
.SH "GLOBAL SECTION"
.TP 
.B auth file
Specify where to find the authentication file used to authenticate
l2tp tunnels. The default is /etc/l2tpd/l2tp\-secrets.

.TP 
.B ipsec saref
Use ipsec Security Association trackinng. When this is enabled, packets
received by xl2tpd should have to extra fields (refme and refhim) which
allows tracking of multiple clients using the same internal NATed IP
address, and allows tracking of multiple clients behind the same
NAT router. This neds to be supported by the kernel. Currently, this
only works with Openswan KLIPS in "mast" mode. (see http://www.openswan.org/)

Set this to yes and the system will provide proper SAref values in the
recvmsg() calls.

Values can be yes or no. The default is no.

.TP 
.B listen-addr
The IP address of the interface on which the daemon listens.  By default,
it listens on INADDR_ANY (0.0.0.0), meaning it listens on all interfaces.

.TP 
.B port
Specify which UDP port xl2tpd should use. The default is 1701.

.TP 
.B access control
If set to yes, the xl2tpd process will only accept connections from
peers addresses specified in the following sections. The default is no.

.TP
.B debug avp
Set this to yes to enable syslog output of L2TP AVP debugging information.

.TP
.B debug network
Set this to yes to enable syslog output of network debugging information.

.TP
.B debug packet
Set this to yes to enable printing of L2TP packet debugging information.
Note: Output goes to STDOUT, so use this only in conjunction with the
.B -D
command line option.

.TP
.B debug state
Set this to yes to enable syslog output of FSM debugging information.

.TP
.B debug tunnel
Set this to yes to enable syslog output of tunnel debugging information.

.SH "LNS SECTION"
.TP 
.B exclusive
If set to yes, only one control tunnel will be allowed to be built
between 2 peers. CHECK

.TP 
.B (no) ip range
Specify the range of ip addresses the LNS will assign to the connecting
LAC PPP tunnels. Multiple ranges can be defined. Using the 'no'
statement disallows the use of that particular range.  Ranges are defined
using the format IP \- IP (example: 1.1.1.1 \- 1.1.1.10).  Note that either
at least one
.B ip range
option must be given, or you must set
.B assign ip
to no.

.TP
.B assign ip
Set this to no if xl2tpd should not assign IP addresses out of the pool
defined with the
.B ip range 
option.  This can be useful if you have some other means to assign IP
addresses, e. g. a pppd that supports RADIUS AAA.


.TP 
.B (no) lac
Specify the ip addresses of LAC's which are allowed to connect to xl2tpd
acting as a LNS. The format is the same as the 
.B ip range 
option.

.TP 
.B hidden bit
If set to yes, xl2tpd will use the AVP hiding feature of L2TP. To get
more information about hidden AVP's and AVP in general, refer to rfc2661
(add URL?)

.TP 
.B local ip
Use the following IP as xl2tpd's own ip address.

.TP 
.B length bit
If set to yes, the length bit present in the l2tp packet payload
will be used.

.TP 
.B (refuse | require) chap
Will require or refuse the remote peer to get authenticated via CHAP for the 
ppp authentication.

.TP 
.B (refuse | require) pap
Will require or refuse the remote peer to get authenticated via PAP for the 
ppp authentication.

.TP 
.B (refuse | require) authentication
Will require or refuse the remote peer to authenticate itself.

.TP 
.B unix authentication
If set to yes, /etc/passwd will be used for remote peer ppp authentication.

.TP 
.B hostname
Will report this as the xl2tpd hostname in negociation.

.TP 
.B ppp debug
This will enable the debug for pppd.

.TP 
.B pppoptfile
Specify the path for a file which contains pppd configuration parameters
to be used.

.TP 
.B call rws
This option is deprecated and no longer functions.  It used to be used
to define the flow control window size for individual L2TP calls or
sessions.  The L2TP standard (RFC2661) no longer defines flow control or
window sizes on calls or sessions.

.TP 
.B tunnel rws
This defines the window size of the control channel.  The window size is
defined as the number of outstanding unacknowledged packets, not as a
number of bytes.

.TP 
.B flow bits
If set to yes, sequence numbers will be included in the communication.
The feature to use sequence numbers in sessions is currently broken and
does not function.

.TP 
.B challenge
If set to yes, use challenge authentication to authenticate peer.

.TP
.B rx bps
If set, the receive bandwidth maximum will be set to this value

.TP
.B tx bps
If set, the transmit bandwidth maximum will be set to this value

.SH "LAC SECTION"
The following are LAC specific configuration flags. Most of those
described in the LNS section may be used in a LAC context, where
it make common sense (essentially l2tp procotols tuning flags and
authentication / ppp related ones).

.TP 
.B lns
Set the dns name or ip address of the LNS to connect to.

.TP 
.B redial
If set to yes, xl2tpd will attemps to redial if the call get disconected.

.TP 
.B redial timeout
Wait X seconds before redial. The redial option must be set to yes
to use this option.

.TP 
.B max redial 
Will give up redial tries after X attempts.

.SH "FILES"

\fB\fR/etc/xl2tpd/xl2tpd.conf \fB\fR/etc/xl2tpd/l2tp\-secrets 
\fB\fR/var/run/xl2tpd/l2tp\-control
.SH "BUGS"

Please address bugs and comment to xl2tpd\-dev@xelerance.com
.SH "SEE ALSO"

\fB\fRxl2tpd(8)
.SH "AUTHORS"
Forked from xl2tpd by Xelerance (http://www.xelerance.com/software/xl2tpd/

Michael Richardson <mcr@xelerance.com>
Paul Wouters <paul@xelerance.com>

Many thanks to Jacco de Leeuw <jacco2@dds.nl> for maintaining l2tpd.


Previous development was hosted at sourceforge
(http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/l2tpd) by:
.P
Scott Balmos <sbalmos@iglou.com>
.br
David Stipp <dstipp@one.net>
.br
Jeff McAdams <jeffm@iglou.com>


Based off of l2tpd version 0.60
.br
Copyright (C)1998 Adtran, Inc.
.br
Mark Spencer <markster@marko.net>
