.TH "xl2tpd" "8" "" "Jeff McAdams" ""
.SH "NAME"
xl2tpd \- Layer 2 Tunnelling Protocol Daemon
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
A Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol VPN client/daemon for Linux and other POSIX-based
OSs. Based off of L2TPd 0.61 from 
  http://www.marko.net/l2tp 
and patches collected by Jacco de Leeuw at
  http://www.jacco2.dds.nl/networking/openswan-l2tp.html

Currently maintained by Xelerance
  http://www.xelerance.com/software/xl2tpd/

xl2tpd implements the Layer 2 Tunnelling Protocol, defined by RFC 2661.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP 
.B -D
This option prevents xl2tpd from detaching from the terminal and
daemonizing.  

.TP 
.B -c <config file>
Tells xl2tpd to use an alternate config file.  Default is
/etc/xl2tpd/xl2tpd.conf. Fallback configuration file is
/etc/l2tpd/l2tpd.conf

.TP 
.B -s <secret file>
Tells xl2tpd to use an alternate "secrets" file.  Default is
/etc/xl2tpd/l2tp-secrets

.TP 
.B -p <pid file>
Tells xl2tpd to use an alternate pid file.  Default is
/var/run/xl2tpd/xl2tpd.pid

.TP 
.B -C <control file>
Tells xl2tpd to use an alternate control file.  Default is
/var/run/xl2tpd/l2tp-control


.SH "FILES"

\fB\fR/etc/xl2tpd/xl2tpd.conf \fB\fR/etc/xl2tpd/l2tp\-secrets 
\fB\fR/var/run/l2tp\-control
.SH "BUGS"

Please address bugs and comment to xl2tpd\-dev@xelerance.com
.SH "SEE ALSO"

\fB\fRxl2tpd.conf(5)
.SH "AUTHORS"
Forked from l2tpd by Xelerance (http://www.xelerance.com/software/xl2tpd/

Michael Richardson <mcr@xelerance.com>
Paul Wouters <paul@xelerance.com>

Many thanks to Jacco de Leeuw <jacco2@dds.nl> for maintaining l2tpd.


Previous development was hosted at sourceforge
(http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/l2tpd) by:
.P
Scott Balmos <sbalmos@iglou.com>
.br
David Stipp <dstipp@one.net>
.br
Jeff McAdams <jeffm@iglou.com>


Based off of l2tpd version 0.60
.br
Copyright (C)1998 Adtran, Inc.
.br
Mark Spencer <markster@marko.net>
