.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Erik Larsson / Tuxera Inc.
.\"
.TH EXFATLABEL 8 "August 2011" "Tuxera exFAT 3013.11.8"
.SH NAME
exfatlabel \- display/change the label on an exFAT file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B exfatlabel
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B exfatlabel
will display or change the file system label on the exFAT file system located on
.IR device .
.PP
If none of the \fB\-l\fR or the \fB\-d\fR options are specified, the current
volume label will be printed to standard output and no modifications will be
made.
.PP
It is also possible to set the file system label using the
.B \-l
option of
.BR mkexfat (8)
during creation of the file system.
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that
.B exfatlabel
accepts.  Nearly all options have two equivalent names.  The short name is
preceded by
.B \-
and the long name is preceded by
.BR \-\- .
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-label\fR LABEL
Set the volume label of an exFAT volume to \fBLABEL\fR. The volume label is
limited to 11 UTF\-16 units, i.e. 11 characters in most cases. This option and
the \fB\-d\fR option are mutually exclusive.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-delete\fR
Deletes the volume label that is currently set for the exFAT volume. Changing
the volume label to an empty string is similar to deleting it, but on a lower
level the former means that the volume label entry in the root directory is
still present while after a delete it is completely removed. This option and the
\fB\-l\fR option are mutually exclusive.
.SH BUGS
There are no known problems with
.BR exfatlabel .
If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to 
exfat-support@tuxera.com.
.hy
.SH AUTHORS
.B exfatlabel
was written by Erik Larsson, Tuxera Inc.
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B exfatlabel
is part of the
.B Tuxera exFAT
package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR exfat\-u (8)
