.\" LIC: GPL
.TH PPPOE-SERVER 8 "21 June 2008"
.\""
.UC 4
.SH NAME
pppoe-server \- user-space PPPoE server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pppoe-server \fR[\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBpppoe-server\fR is a user-space server for PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol
over Ethernet) for Linux and other UNIX systems.  \fBpppoe-server\fR works in
concert with the \fBpppoe\fR client to respond to PPPoE discovery packets
and set up PPPoE sessions.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-F
The \fB\-F\fR option causes \fBpppoe-server\fR not to fork and become a
daemon.  The default is to fork and become a daemon.

.TP
.B \-I \fIinterface\fR
The \fB\-I\fR option specifies the Ethernet interface to use.  Under
Linux, it is typically \fIeth0\fR or \fIeth1\fR.  The interface should
be "up" before you start \fBpppoe-server\fR, but need not have an IP
address.  You can supply multiple \fB\-I\fR options if you want the
server to respond on more than one interface.

.TP
.B \-X \fIpidfile\fR
This option causes \fBpppoe-server\fR to write its process ID to
\fIpidfile\fR.  Additionally, it keeps the file locked so that only
a single process may be started for a given \fIpidfile\fR.

.TP
.B \-q \fI/path/to/pppd\fR
Specifies the full path to the \fBpppd\fR program.  The default is determined
at compile time.  One use of this option is to supply a wrapper program that
modifies the arguments passed to pppd.  This lets you do things not directly
supported by the server (for example, specify IPv6 addresses.)

.TP
.B \-Q \fI/path/to/pppoe\fR
Specifies the full path to the \fBpppoe\fR program.  The default is determined
at compile time.  This option is only relevant if you are \fInot\fR
using kernel-mode PPPoE.

.TP
.B \-T \fItimeout\fR
This option is passed directly to \fBpppoe\fR; see \fBpppoe\fR(8) for
details.  If you are using kernel-mode PPPoE, this option has \fIno effect\fR.

.TP
.B \-C \fIac_name\fR
Specifies which name to report as the access concentrator name.  If not
supplied, the host name is used.

.TP
.B \-S \fIname\fR
Offer a service named \fIname\fR.  Multiple \fB\-S\fR options may
be specified; each one causes the named service to be advertised
in a Service-Name tag in the PADO frame.  The first \fB\-S\fR option
specifies the default service, and is used if the PPPoE client
requests a Service-Name of length zero.

.TP
.B \-m \fIMSS\fR
This option is passed directly to \fBpppoe\fR; see \fBpppoe\fR(8) for
details.  If you are using kernel-mode PPPoE, this option has \fIno effect\fR.

.TP
.B \-x \fIn\fR
Limit the number of sessions per peer MAC address to \fIn\fR.  If a given
MAC address attempts to create more than \fIn\fR sessions, then its
PADI and PADR packets are ignored.  If you set \fIn\fR to 0 (the default),
then no limit is imposed on the number of sessions per peer MAC address.

.TP
.B \-s
This option is passed directly to \fBpppoe\fR; see \fBpppoe\fR(8) for
details.  In addition, it causes \fBpppd\fR to be invoked with the
\fIsync\fR option.

.TP
.B \-L \fIip\fR
Sets the local IP address.  This is passed to spawned \fBpppd\fR processes.
If not specified, the default is 10.0.0.1.

.TP
.B \-R \fIip\fR
Sets the starting remote IP address.  As sessions are established,
IP addresses are assigned starting from \fIip\fR.   \fBpppoe-server\fR
automatically keeps track of the pool of addresses and passes a
valid remote IP address to \fBpppd\fR.  If not specified, a starting address
of 10.67.15.1 is used.

.TP
.B \-N \fInum\fR
Allows at most \fInum\fR concurrent PPPoE sessions.  If not specified,
the default is 64.

.TP
.B \-O \fIfname\fR
This option causes \fBpppoe-server\fR to tell \fBpppd\fR to use the option
file \fIfname\fR instead of the default \fI/etc/ppp/pppoe-server-options\fR.

.TP
.B \-p \fIfname\fR
Reads the specified file \fIfname\fR which is a text file consisting of
one IP address per line.  These IP addresses will be assigned to clients.
The number of sessions allowed will equal the number of addresses found
in the file.  The \fB\-p\fR option overrides both \fB\-R\fR and \fB\-N\fR.

In addition to containing IP addresses, the pool file can contain lines
of the form:

.nf
	a.b.c.d-e
.fi

which includes all IP addresses from a.b.c.d to a.b.c.e.  For example,
the line:

.nf
	1.2.3.4-7
.fi

is equivalent to:

.nf
	1.2.3.4
	1.2.3.5
	1.2.3.6
	1.2.3.7
.fi

.TP
.B \-r
Tells the PPPoE server to randomly permute session numbers.  Instead of
handing out sessions in order, the session numbers are assigned in an
unpredictable order.

.TP
.B \-u
Tells the server to invoke \fBpppd\fR with the \fIunit\fR option.  Note
that this option only works for \fBpppd\fR version 2.4.0 or newer.

.TP
.B \-o \fIoffset\fR
Instead of numbering PPPoE sessions starting at 1, they will be numbered
starting at \fIoffset\fR+1.  This allows you to run multiple servers on
a given machine; just make sure that their session numbers do not
overlap.

.TP
.B \-f disc:sess
The \fB\-f\fR option sets the Ethernet frame types for PPPoE discovery
and session frames.  The types are specified as hexadecimal numbers
separated by a colon.  Standard PPPoE uses frame types 8863:8864.
\fIYou should not use this option\fR unless you are absolutely sure
the peer you are dealing with uses non-standard frame types.

.TP
.B \-k
The \fB\-k\fR option tells the server to use kernel-mode PPPoE on Linux.
This option is available only on Linux kernels 2.4.0 and later, and
only if the server was built with kernel-mode support.

.TP
.B \-i
The \fB\-i\fR option tells the server to completely ignore PADI frames
if there are no free session slots.

.TP
.B \-h
The \fB\-h\fR option prints a brief usage message and exits.

.SH OPERATION

\fBpppoe-server\fR listens for incoming PPPoE discovery packets.  When
a session is established, it spawns a \fBpppd\fR process.  The following
options are passed to \fBpppd\fR:

.nf
nodetach noaccomp nobsdcom nodeflate nopcomp novj novjccomp
default-asyncmap
.fi

In addition, the local and remote IP address are set based on the
\fB\-L\fR and \fB\-R\fR options.  The \fBpty\fR option is supplied along
with a \fBpppoe\fR command to initiate the PPPoE session.  Finally,
additional \fBpppd\fR options can be placed in the file
\fB/etc/ppp/pppoe-server-options\fR (which must exist, even if it is just
empty!)

Note that \fBpppoe-server\fR is meant mainly for testing PPPoE clients.
It is \fInot\fR a high-performance server meant for production use.

.SH AUTHORS
\fBpppoe-server\fR was written by David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com>.

The \fBpppoe\fR home page is \fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR.

.SH SEE ALSO
pppoe-start(8), pppoe-stop(8), pppoe-connect(8), pppd(8), pppoe.conf(5),
pppoe(8), pppoe-setup(8), pppoe-status(8), pppoe-sniff(8), pppoe-relay(8)

