.\" Copyright (c) 2002\-2004 Anton Altaparmakov.
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Richard Russon.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\"
.TH NTFSLABEL 8 "Sept 2011" "Tuxera NTFS Utilities 3014.5.21"
.SH NAME
ntfslabel \- display/change the label on an NTFS file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ntfslabel
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice \fR[\fInew\-label\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ntfslabel
will display or change the file system label on the ntfs file system located on
.IR device .
.PP
If the optional argument
.I new\-label
is not present,
.B ntfslabel
will simply display the current file system label.
.PP
If the optional argument
.I new\-label
is present, then
.B ntfslabel
will set the file system label to be
.IR new\-label .
NTFS file system labels can be at most 128 Unicode characters long; if
.I new\-label
is longer than 128 Unicode characters,
.B ntfslabel
will truncate it and print a warning message.
.PP
It is also possible to set the file system label using the
.B \-L
option of
.BR mkntfs (8)
during creation of the file system.
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that
.B ntfslabel
accepts.  Nearly all options have two equivalent names.  The short name is
preceded by
.B \-
and the long name is preceded by
.BR \-\- .
Any single letter options, that don't take an argument, can be combined into a
single command, e.g.
.B \-fv
is equivalent to
.BR "\-f \-v" .
Long named options can be abbreviated to any unique prefix of their name.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-force\fR
This will override some sensible defaults, such as not working with a mounted
volume.  Use this option with caution.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Show a list of options with a brief description of each one.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-no\-action\fR
Don't actually write to disk.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Reduce the amount of output to a minimum.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Increase the amount of output that
.B ntfslabel
prints.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Show the version number, copyright and license for
.BR ntfslabel .
.SH BUGS
If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to
ntfs-support@tuxera.com. 
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B ntfslabel
is part of the
.B Tuxera NTFS
package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkntfs (8)
