#
# List of known perf commands.
# command name			category [deprecated] [common]
#
perf-annotate			mainporcelain common
perf-archive			mainporcelain common
perf-bench			mainporcelain common
perf-buildid-cache		mainporcelain common
perf-buildid-list		mainporcelain common
perf-diff			mainporcelain common
perf-inject			mainporcelain common
perf-list			mainporcelain common
perf-sched			mainporcelain common
perf-record			mainporcelain common
perf-report			mainporcelain common
perf-stat			mainporcelain common
perf-timechart			mainporcelain common
perf-top			mainporcelain common
perf-trace			mainporcelain common
perf-probe			mainporcelain common
perf-kmem			mainporcelain common
perf-lock			mainporcelain common
perf-kvm			mainporcelain common
perf-test			mainporcelain common
