.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Erik Larsson / Tuxera Inc.
.\"
.TH THFSLABEL 8 "Dec 2013" "Tuxera HFS+ Utilities 3014.8.10"
.SH NAME
thfslabel \- Display/change the label on an HFS+ file system.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBthfslabel\fR [\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice \fR[\fInew\-label\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBthfslabel\fR will display or change the file system label on the HFS+ file
system located on \fIdevice\fR.
.PP
If the optional argument \fInew\-label\fR is not present, \fBthfslabel\fR will
simply print the current file system label as a UTF-8 string.
.PP
If the optional argument \fInew\-label\fR is present, then \fBthfslabel\fR will
set the file system label to be the string \fInew\-label\fR, given in UTF-8
format.
.br
HFS+ file system labels can be at most 255 UTF-16 code units of decomposed
Unicode long; if \fInew\-label\fR is longer than 255 UTF-16 code units of
decomposed Unicode, \fBthfslabel\fR will truncate it and print a warning
message. Note that the string in \fInew\-label\fR will be decomposed
automatically by \fBthfslabel\fR.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that \fBthfslabel\fR accepts.
.TP
\fB\-\-output-mode\fR=[mode]
Specify the output mode when printing the volume label. Currently the supported
output modes are \fBraw\fR and \fBcomposed\fR.
.br
Raw mode means that the label is converted from UTF-16 to UTF-8 without any
further transformation. This implies that the output will be in decomposed
Unicode since this is how strings are stored in HFS+.
.br
Composed mode means that the label is converted from the on-disk decomposed form
into composed Unicode, which is what most operating systems expect (Mac OS X
being the exception).
.br
The default behaviour (when this option is not given) is the behaviour of the
\fBcomposed\fR option.
.SH BUGS
If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to
hfs-support@tuxera.com.
.SH AVAILABILITY
\fBthfslabel\fR is part of the \fBTuxera HFS+ Utilities\fR package.
