.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Sougata Santra / Tuxera Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Erik Larsson / Tuxera Inc.
.\"
.TH MKFATFS 8 "March 2014" "Tuxera TFATprogs 3014.9.11"
.SH NAME
mkfatfs \- create a FAT file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkfatfs
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkfatfs
is used to create a FAT file system on a device (usually a disk or flash
partition).
.I device
is the special file corresponding to the device (e.g.
.IR /dev/sdXX, 
.IR /dev/block/mmcblk1p1 ).
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that
.B mkfatfs
accepts.  Nearly all options have two equivalent names.  The short name is
preceded by
.B \-
and the long name is preceded by
.BR \-\- .
.TP
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-force\fR
Allow formatting a FAT volume for which the physical sector size cannot be
automatically detected (for example an image file).
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-volume\-label\fR STRING
Set the volume label for the filesystem. The volume label can be up to 11
ASCII units long, i.e. in most cases 11 bytes.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-volume\-id\fR STRING
Sets the volume-id for the volume to \fBSTRING\fR.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-rootdir\-entries\fR NUMBER
Set the count of 32 bytes directory entries in the root directory to \fBNUMBER\fR.
For FAT32 volumes this value is ignored and set to zero. For FAT 12/16 volume the
default value is 512.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-fat\-type\fR FATBITS
Set the FAT bits for the volume to \fBFATBITS\fR. The legal values for
this field are [12, 16, 32].
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-sector\-size\fR SIZE
Set the volume sector size (in bytes) to \fBSIZE\fR. The default is to
detect sector size automatically. Note: This option should probably never be
used when formatting devices directly as most FAT drivers won't be able to use
a FAT volume where the volume sector size doesn't match the physical sector
size.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-sectors\-per\-cluster\fR VALUE
Set the volume cluster size (in bytes) to \fBVALUE\fR * \fBsector_size\fR.
The default value is calculated dynamically depending on FAT type
(FAT 12/16/32) and the size of the volume. The legal values for this field
are [1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128], such that \fBVALUE\fR * \fBsector_size\fR
does not exceed 32K.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Makes
.B mkfatfs
emit certain status messages related to the formatting process.
.TP
\fB\-\-sda\-strict\fR
Forces the formatted volume to adhere to SD Association recommendations.
.TP
\fB\-\-sda\-whole\fR
Performs a whole device formatting, including partition table, according to the
SD Association recommendations. This option should only be used with whole
devices (e.g. \fI/dev/mmcblk0\fR) and never partitions (e.g. \fI/dev/mmcblk0p1\fR).
.TP
\fB\-\-sda\-relax\fR
Relaxes sanity checks for \fB\-\-sda\-strict\fR and \fB\-\-sda\-whole\fR to
allow formatting devices that don't comply to the size specifications of SD
cards to be formatted according to the SD Association guidelines.

NOTE: This option is only a modifier to \fB\-\-sda\-strict\fR and
\fB\-\-sda\-whole\fR and does not do anything on its own.
.TP
\fB\-\-discard\fR
This option sends a 'discard' command, like TRIM, to the device
which will zero all data on it.
.SH BUGS
If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to 
fat-support@tuxera.com.
.SH AUTHORS
.B mkfatfs
was written by Sougata Santra, Tuxera Inc.
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B mkfatfs
is part of the
.B Tuxera FATprogs
package.
