.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Tuxera Inc.
.\"
.TH NEWFS_HFS 8 "December 2013" "Tuxera HFS+ 3014.7.28"
.SH NAME
newfs_hfs \- create a HFS+ file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B newfs_hfs
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B newfs_hfs
is used to create an HFS+ file system on a device (usually a disk or flash
partition) or image.
.I device
is the special file corresponding to the device (e.g.
.IR /dev/sdXX, 
.IR /dev/block/mmcblk1p1 )
or an image file.
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that
.B newfs_hfs
accepts.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR,
Creates a case-sensitive HFS+ file-system. By default a case-insensitive
file-system is created.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR
Adds an HFS wrapper around the HFS+ file system.
.TP
\fB\-U\fR UID
Set owner of the file-system root directory.
.TP
\fB\-G\fR GID
Set group of the file-system root directory.
.TP
\fB\-M\fR MASK
Set permission mask for the file-system root directory.
.TP
\fB\-b\fR SIZE
Set the allocation block size (in bytes) to \fBSIZE\fR. The default value
is 4096.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR VOLUME-NAME
Volume name in ASCII or UTF-8 format.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR FIRST-CNID
Sets the first catalog node ID for user files and directories. The default
value is 16.
.TP
\fB\-N\fR PARTITION-SIZE
Print summary of file-system parameters without actually creating the file-
system. This might be useful for verifying the actual parameters before
creating the file-system.
.TP
\fB\-J\fR JOURNAL-SIZE
Creates a journaled HFS+ volume. The default journal size is 8MB.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR CLUMP-SIZE-LIST
Sets the clump and/or initial sizes, in allocation blocks, for meta-data
files. It is specified with -c option followed by comma seperated list
of the form args=value.

.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Em a=blocks
Set the attribute file clump size.
.It Em b=blocks
Set the allocation bitmap file clump size.
.It Em c=blocks
Set the catalog file clump size.
.It Em e=blocks
Set the extent overflow file clump size.
.El

.TP
\fB\-n\fR NODE-SIZE-LIST
Sets  b-tree node sizes, in bytes, for the various b-tree files. It is specified
with the -n option followed by a comma separated list of the form arg=value.
Node size must be a power of two and no larger than 32768 bytes. 
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Em a=bytes
Set the attribute b-tree node size.
.It Em c=bytes
Set the catalog b-tree node size.
.It Em e=bytes
Set the extent overflow b-tree node size.
.El

.SH BUGS
If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to 
hfs-support@tuxera.com.
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B newfs_hfs
is part of the
.B Tuxera HFS+
package.
.hy
