.\"
.\"
.\"   Authors:
.\"    Lars Fenneberg		<lf@elemental.net>	 
.\"    Marko Myllynen		<myllynen@lut.fi>	
.\"
.\"   This software is Copyright 1996 by the above mentioned author(s), 
.\"   All Rights Reserved.
.\"
.\"   The license which is distributed with this software in the file COPYRIGHT
.\"   applies to this software. If your distribution is missing this file, you
.\"   may request it from <pekkas@netcore.fi>.
.\"
.\"
.\"
.TH RADVDUMP 8 "31 Mar 2008" "radvd @VERSION@" ""
.SH NAME
radvdump \- dump router advertisements
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radvdump
.B "[ \-vhfe ]"
.BI "[ \-d " debuglevel " ]"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B radvdump
prints out the contents of incoming router advertisements sent by
.B radvd
or some other software implementing (parts of)
"Neighbor Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6)" (RFC 4861).

.SH OPTIONS

For every one character option there is also a long option, which
is listed right next to the "short" option name:

.TP
.BR "\-v" , " \-\-version"
Displays the version of
.I radvdump
and then aborts.
.TP
.BR "\-h" , " \-\-help"
Displays a short usage description and then aborts.
.TP
.BR "\-f" , " \-\-file\-format"
Output received router advertisements in the format of the
.B radvd
configuration file.
Since radvd 0.9, this is the default and the switch is provided
for backward compatibility only.
.TP
.BR "\-e" , " \-\-exclude-defaults"
Exclude default valued options from configuration file format.
This option is ignored if option
.B "\-f"
is not set.
.TP
.BR "\-d " debuglevel, " \-\-debug " debuglevel
With this option you turn on debugging information. The debugging level is
an integer in the range from 1 to 4, from quiet to very verbose. A
debugging level of 0 completely turns off debugging.

The default debugging level is 0.

.SH FILES

.nf
@sbindir@/radvdump
.fi
.SH BUGS

There certainly are some bugs. If you find them or have other
suggestions please contact Pekka Savola <pekkas@netcore.fi>.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR radvd (8),
.BR radvd.conf (5)
.SH AUTHORS

.nf
Lars Fenneberg	<lf@elemental.net>	- previous maintainer
Nathan Lutchansky <lutchann@litech.org> - previous maintainer
Pekka Savola	<pekkas@netcore.fi>	- current maintainer
Marko Myllynen	<myllynen@lut.fi>	- Mobile IPv6 support
.fi
