.\" Copyright (c) 2002\-2004 Anton Altaparmakov.
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Richard Russon.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\"
.TH NTFSINFO 8 "Sept 2011" "Tuxera NTFS Utilities 3014.5.21"
.SH NAME
ntfsinfo \- show NTFS volume, file, inode, attribute information
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ntfsinfo
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ntfsinfo
will show the attributes of inode
.I inode\-number
or the file
.I path\-filename
and/or information about the mft with the 
.I \-m
option.
Run ntfsinfo without arguments for a full list of options.
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that
.B ntfsinfo
accepts. Nearly all options have two equivalent names. The short name is
preceded by
.B \-
and the long name is preceded by
.BR \-\- .
Any single letter options, that don't take an argument, can be combined into a
single command, e.g.
.B \-fv
is equivalent to
.BR "\-f \-v" .
Long named options can be abbreviated to any unique prefix of their name.
.TP
\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-file\fR FILE
Show information about this file
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-force\fR
This will override some sensible defaults, such as not overwriting an existing
file.  Use this option with caution.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Show a list of options with a brief description of each one.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-inode\fR NUM
Show information about this inode.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-mft\fR
Show information about the volume.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Produce less output.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-notime\fR
Do not display timestamps in the output.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Increase the amount of output that
.B ntfsinfo
prints.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Show the version number, copyright and license.
.SH BUGS
If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to
ntfs\-support@tuxera.com.
.hy
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B ntfsinfo
is part of the
.B Tuxera NTFS
package.
