.\"
.\" udpxrec.1
.\"
.\" Original: (pcherenkov@gmail.com)
.\"
.TH udpxrec 1 "November 18, 2012" "Version 1.0" "udpxrec manual page"

.SH NAME
udpxrec \- a programmable multicast traffic recording utility.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B udpxrec
[\-v] [\-b \fI<begin_time>\fP] [\-e \fI<end_time>\fP] [\-M \fI<maxfilesize>\fP] [\-p \fI<pidfile>\fP] [\-B \fI<bufsizeK>\fP]
[\-n \fI<nice_incr>\fP] [\-u \fI<seconds_to_wait>\fP] [\-m \fI<mcast_ifc_addr>\fP] [\-l \fI<logfile>\fP] \-c \fI<src_addr>\fP:\fI<port>\fP \fI<dstfile>\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
udpxrec is a utility designed to record (save into a disk file) a segment of multicast network traffic; the amount of data saved/recorded could be specified in length (KB) or duration (seconds).

.SH OPTIONS
udpxrec accepts the following options:

.TP 8
.B \-v
Enable verbose output [default = \fIdisabled\fP].
.TP 8
.B \-T
Do NOT run as a daemon [default = \fIdaemon if root\fP].
.TP 8
.B \-m \fI<mcast_ifc_addr>\fP
IPv4 address/interface of (multicast) source [default = \fI0.0.0.0\fP].
.TP 8
.B \-l \fI<logfile>\fP
Log output to file [default = \fIstderr\fP].
.TP 8
.B \-n \fI<nice_incr>\fP
Nice value increment [default = \fI0\fP].
.TP 8
.B \-B \fI<sizeK>\fP
Buffer size (65536, 32Kb, 1Mb) for inbound (multicast) data [default = \fI2048 bytes\fP].
.TP 8
.B \-R \fI<msgs>\fP
Maximum number of messages to buffer (\fI\-1\fP = \fIall\fP) [default = \fI1\fP].
.TP 8
.B \-b \fI<begin_time>\fP
Begin recording at \fI[+]dd:hh24:mi.ss\fP, '\fB+\fP' signifies relative timing (in N hours/min/sec).
.TP 8
.B \-e \fI<endtime>\fP
Stop recording at \fI[+]dd:hh24:mi.ss\fP, '\fB+\fP' signifies relative timing (in N hours/min/sec).
.TP 8
.B \-M \fI<maxfilesize>\fP
Maximum size of destination file.
.TP 8
.B \-p \fI<pidfile>\fP
Pidfile for this process [\fBMUST be specified if daemon\fP].
.TP 8
.B \-u \fI<seconds_to_wait>\fP
Seconds to wait before updating on how long till recording starts.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.B udpxrec \-b 15:45.00 \-e +2:00.00 \-M 1.5Gb \-n 2 \-B 64K \-c 224.0.11.31:5050  /opt/video/tv5.mpg
.PP
Begin recording multicast channel 224.0.11.31:5050 at 15:45 today,
finish recording in two hours or if destination file size >= 1.5 Gb;
set socket buffer to 64Kb; increment nice value by 2;
write captured video to /opt/video/tv5.mpg.

.SH AUTHORS
Pavel V. Cherenkov and all the good people who submitted patches or otherwise contributed to the project.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR udpxy (1)

.\" __EOF__

