.TH avahi-publish-service 1 User Manuals
.SH NAME
avahi-publish-service \- Register an mDNS/DNS-SD service or host name or address mapping using the Avahi daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBavahi-publish -s [\fIoptions\fB] \fIname\fB \fIservice-type\fB \fIport\fB [\fITXT data\fB ...]

avahi-publish-service [\fIoptions\fB] \fIname\fB \fIservice-type\fB \fIport\fB [\fITXT data\fB ...]

avahi-publish -a [\fIoptions\fB] \fIhost name\fB \fIaddress\fB

avahi-publish-address [\fIoptions\fB] \fIhost name\fB \fIaddress\fB
\f1
.SH DESCRIPTION
Register an mDNS/DNS-SD service or host name/address mapping using the Avahi daemon.
.SH OPTIONS
When calling in service registration mode, specify a DNS-SD service name (e.g. "Lennart's Files"), a service type (e.g. _http._tcp) and an IP port number for the service, optionally followed by any number of TXT record strings on the command line. When calling in address/host name registration mode specify a fully qualified host name and an address (IPv4 or IPv6).
.TP
\fB-s | --service\f1
Register a service. avahi-publish-service is equivalent to avahi-publish -s.
.TP
\fB-a | --address\f1
Register an address/host name mapping. avahi-publish-address is equivalent to avahi-publish -a.
.TP
\fB-v | --verbose\f1
Enable verbose mode.
.TP
\fB-H | --host=\f1 \fIHOSTNAME\f1
Specify a host name for this service, in case it doesn't reside on the local host. This host name needs to be fully qualified and resolvable using mDNS or unicast DNS.
.TP
\fB-d | --domain=\f1 \fIDOMAIN\f1
Publish the service in the specified domain. If omitted the Avahi daemon will publish it in its default domain (usually .local).
.TP
\fB--subtype=\f1 \fISUBTYPE\f1
Register the service with an additional subtype in addition to the main type. DNS-SD subtypes have the form _anon._sub._ftp._tcp, where _anon is the identifier of the subtype and _ftp._tcp is the main type. You may pass this option multiple times to register the service with multiple subtypes.
.TP
\fB-f | --no-fail\f1
Don't fail if the daemon is not found running. Instead, wait until it appears. If it disconnects, try to reconnect.
.TP
\fB-h | --help\f1
Show help
.TP
\fB-V | --version\f1
Show version information.
.SH AUTHORS
The Avahi Developers <avahi (at) lists (dot) freedesktop (dot) org>; Avahi is available from \fBhttp://avahi.org/\f1
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBavahi-resolve(1)\f1, \fBavahi-browse(1)\f1, \fBavahi-daemon(8)\f1
.SH COMMENTS
This man page was written using \fBxml2man(1)\f1 by Oliver Kurth.
