.TH avahi-resolve 1 User Manuals
.SH NAME
avahi-resolve \- Resolve one or more mDNS/DNS host name(s) to IP address(es) (and vice versa) using the Avahi daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBavahi-resolve --name \fIhost-name ...\fB

avahi-resolve-host-name \fIhost-name ...\fB

avahi-resolve --address \fIaddress ...\fB

avahi-resolve-address \fIaddress ...\fB
\f1
.SH DESCRIPTION
Resolve one or more mDNS/DNS host name(s) to IP address(es) (and vice versa) using the Avahi daemon.
.SH OPTIONS
When passing -n, specify one or more fully qualified mDNS/DNS host name(s) (e.g. "foo.local") to resolve into IP addresses on the command line. When passing -a, specify one or more IP address to resolve into host names.

avahi-resolve-host-name is equivalent to avahi-resolve --name.

avahi-resolve-address is equivalent to avahi-resolve --address.
.TP
\fB-n | --name\f1
Translate one or more fully qualified host names into addresses.
.TP
\fB-a | --address\f1
Translate one or more addresses into fully qualified host names.
.TP
\fB-v | --verbose\f1
Enable verbose mode.
.TP
\fB-6\f1
When resolving a host name, look for IPv6 addresses exclusively.
.TP
\fB-4\f1
When resolving a host name, look for IPv4 addresses exclusively.
.TP
\fB-h | --help\f1
Show help.
.TP
\fB-V | --version\f1
Show version information.
.SH AUTHORS
The Avahi Developers <avahi (at) lists (dot) freedesktop (dot) org>; Avahi is available from \fBhttp://avahi.org/\f1
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBavahi-publish-address(1)\f1, \fBavahi-daemon(8)\f1
.SH COMMENTS
This man page was written using \fBxml2man(1)\f1 by Oliver Kurth.
