.TH avahi-autoipd 8 User Manuals
.SH NAME
avahi-autoipd \- IPv4LL network address configuration daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBavahi-autoipd [\fIoptions\fB] \fIinterface\fB

avahi-autoipd --kill\fB \fIinterface\fB

avahi-autoipd --refresh\fB \fIinterface\fB

avahi-autoipd --check\fB \fIinterface\fB
\f1
.SH DESCRIPTION
avahi-autoipd implements IPv4LL, "Dynamic Configuration of IPv4 Link-Local Addresses" (IETF RFC3927), a protocol for automatic IP address configuration from the link-local 169.254.0.0/16 range without the need for a central server. It is primarily intended to be used in ad-hoc networks which lack a DHCP server.

IPv4LL is part of the Zeroconf stack.

avahi-autoipd can be used as stand-alone address allocator or as plugin for a DHCP client such as ISC's dhclient, where it can be used as fallback solution if no DHCP server is found.

To allow communication between hosts that have only an IPv4LL address assigned and hosts that only have a routable IP address assigned you may add the following routes to both network configurations:

\fBroute add -net 169.254.0.0 netmask 255.255.0.0 dev eth0 metric 99\f1

\fBroute add default dev eth0 metric 99\f1

See http://developer.apple.com/qa/qa2004/qa1357.html for more information.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-D | --daemonize\f1
Daemonize after startup. Implies \fB--syslog\f1.
.TP
\fB-k | --kill\f1
Kill an already running avahi-autoipd on the specified network interface. (Equivalent to sending a SIGTERM)
.TP
\fB-r | --refresh\f1
Tell an already running avahi-autoipd to re-announce the acquired IP address on the specified network interface. (Equivalent to sending a SIGHUP)
.TP
\fB-c | --check\f1
Return 0 as return code if avahi-autoipd is already running for the specified network interface.
.TP
\fB-s | --syslog\f1
Log to syslog instead of STDERR. Implied by \fB--daemonize\f1.
.TP
\fB--debug\f1
Enable verbose mode.
.TP
\fB--no-drop-root\f1
Don't drop root privileges after startup. We recommend not to use this option.
.TP
\fB--no-chroot\f1
Don't \fBchroot(2)\f1 the daemon. This option is only available when compiled with chroot() support.
.TP
\fB-S | --start=\f1
Try to acquire the specified IP address, which must be from the IPv4LL range 169.254.0.0/16.
.TP
\fB-w | --wait\f1
Wait until a IP address has been successfully acquired before detaching. Only valid in combination with \fB--daemonize\f1.
.TP
\fB--force-bind\f1
Acquire an IPv4LL address, even if a routable address has been configured on the interface.
.TP
\fB--no-proc-title\f1
Don't change the process name while running. Unless this option is specified avahi-autoipd will reflect its current state and the IP address in the process title.
.TP
\fB-h | --help\f1
Show help.
.TP
\fB-v | --version\f1
Show version information.
.SH FILES
\fI/home/lennart/tmp/avahi/etc/avahi/avahi-autoipd.action\f1: the script to run when an IP address as been acquired or is lost.
.SH SIGNALS
\fISIGINT, SIGTERM\f1: avahi-autoipd will shutdown. (Same as \fB--kill\f1)

\fISIGHUP\f1: avahi-autoipd will re-announce the acquired IP address. (Same as \fB--refresh\f1)
.SH AUTHORS
The Avahi Developers <avahi (at) lists (dot) freedesktop (dot) org>; Avahi is available from \fBhttp://avahi.org/\f1
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBautoipd.action(8)\f1, \fBdhclient(8)\f1

http://avahi.org/wiki/AvahiAutoipd documents how avahi-autoipd is best packaged and integrated into distributions.
.SH COMMENTS
This man page was written using \fBxml2man(1)\f1 by Oliver Kurth.
