.TH avahi-dnsconfd 8 User Manuals
.SH NAME
avahi-dnsconfd \- Unicast DNS server from mDNS/DNS-SD configuration daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBavahi-dnsconfd [\fIoptions\fB]

avahi-dnsconfd --kill\fB

avahi-dnsconfd --refresh\fB

avahi-dnsconfd --check\fB
\f1
.SH DESCRIPTION
avahi-dnsconfd connects to a running avahi-daemon and runs the script \fI/home/lennart/tmp/avahi/etc/avahi/dnsconfd.action\f1 for each unicast DNS server that is announced on the local LAN. This is useful for configuring unicast DNS servers in a DHCP-like fashion with mDNS.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-D | --daemonize\f1
Daemonize after startup and redirect log messages to syslog.
.TP
\fB-s | --syslog\f1
Log to syslog instead of STDERR. Implied by \fB--daemonize\f1.
.TP
\fB-k | --kill\f1
Kill an already running avahi-dnsconfd. (equivalent to sending a SIGTERM)
.TP
\fB-r | --refresh\f1
Tell an already running avahi-dnsconfd to refresh the DNS server data. (equivalent to sending a SIGHUP)
.TP
\fB-c | --check\f1
Return 0 as return code when avahi-dnsconfd is already running.
.TP
\fB-h | --help\f1
Show help
.TP
\fB-v | --version\f1
Show version information 
.SH FILES
\fI/home/lennart/tmp/avahi/etc/avahi/avahi-dnsconfd.action\f1: the script to run when a DNS server is found or removed.
.SH SIGNALS
\fISIGINT, SIGTERM\f1: avahi-dnsconfd will shutdown. This is issued by passing --kill to avahi-daemon.

\fISIGHUP\f1: avahi-dnsconfd will refresh the DNS server data.
.SH AUTHORS
The Avahi Developers <avahi (at) lists (dot) freedesktop (dot) org>; Avahi is available from \fBhttp://avahi.org/\f1
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBavahi-daemon(8)\f1, \fBavahi-dnsconfd.action(8)\f1
.SH COMMENTS
This man page was written using \fBxml2man(1)\f1 by Oliver Kurth.
