.TH BRIDGE 8 "1 August 2012" "iproute2" "Linux"
.SH NAME
bridge \- show / manipulate bridge addresses and devices
.SH SYNOPSIS

.ad l
.in +8
.ti -8
.B bridge
.RI "[ " OPTIONS " ] " OBJECT " { " COMMAND " | "
.BR help " }"
.sp

.ti -8
.IR OBJECT " := { "
.BR link " | " fdb " | " mdb " | " vlan " | " monitor " }"
.sp

.ti -8
.IR OPTIONS " := { "
\fB\-V\fR[\fIersion\fR] |
\fB\-s\fR[\fItatistics\fR] |
\fB\-n\fR[\fIetns\fR] name }

.ti -8
.BR "bridge link set"
.B  dev
.IR DEV
.IR " [ "
.B  cost
.IR COST " ] [ "
.B  priority
.IR PRIO " ]  [ "
.B  state
.IR STATE "] ["
.BR guard " { " on " | " off " } ] [ "
.BR hairpin " { " on " | " off " } ] [ "
.BR fastleave " { " on " | " off " } ] [ "
.BR root_block " { " on " | " off " } ] [ "
.BR learning " { " on " | " off " } ] [ "
.BR learning_sync " { " on " | " off " } ] [ "
.BR flood " { " on " | " off " } ] [ "
.BR hwmode " { " vepa " | " veb " } ] "

.ti -8
.BR "bridge link" " [ " show " ] [ "
.B  dev
.IR DEV " ]"

.ti -8
.BR "bridge fdb" " { " add " | " append " | " del " } "
.I LLADDR
.B  dev
.IR DEV " { "
.BR local " | " temp " } { "
.BR self " } { " embedded " } { " router " } [ "
.B  dst
.IR IPADDR " ] [ "
.B vni
.IR VNI " ] ["
.B port
.IR PORT " ] ["
.B via
.IR DEVICE " ]"

.ti -8
.BR "bridge fdb" " [ " show " ] [ "
.B  dev
.IR DEV " ]"

.ti -8
.BR "bridge mdb" " { " add " | " del " } "
.B  dev
.IR DEV
.B port
.IR PORT
.B grp
.IR GROUP " [ "
.BR permanent " | " temp " ]"

.ti -8
.BR "bridge mdb show " [ "
.B  dev
.IR DEV " ]"

.ti -8
.BR "bridge vlan" " { " add " | " del " } "
.B  dev
.IR DEV
.B  vid 
.IR VID " [ "
.BR  pvid " ] [ " untagged " ]  [ "
.BR  self " ]  [ " master " ] "

.ti -8
.BR "bridge vlan" " [ " show " ] [ "
.B  dev
.IR DEV " ]"

.ti -8
.BR "bridge monitor" " [ " all " | " neigh " | " link " | " mdb " ]"

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BR "\-V" , " -Version"
print the version of the
.B bridge
utility and exit.

.TP
.BR "\-s" , " \-stats", " \-statistics"
output more information.  If this option
is given multiple times, the amount of information increases.
As a rule, the information is statistics or some time values.

.TP
.BR "\-n" , " \-net" , " \-netns " <NETNS>
switches
.B bridge
to the specified network namespace
.IR NETNS .
Actually it just simplifies executing of:

.B ip netns exec
.IR NETNS
.B bridge
.RI "[ " OPTIONS " ] " OBJECT " { " COMMAND " | "
.BR help " }"

to

.B bridge
.RI "-n[etns] " NETNS " [ " OPTIONS " ] " OBJECT " { " COMMAND " | "
.BR help " }"


.SH BRIDGE - COMMAND SYNTAX

.SS
.I OBJECT

.TP
.B link
- Bridge port.

.TP
.B fdb 
- Forwarding Database entry.

.TP
.B mdb
- Multicast group database entry.

.TP
.B vlan
- VLAN filter list.

.SS
.I COMMAND

Specifies the action to perform on the object.
The set of possible actions depends on the object type.
As a rule, it is possible to
.BR "add" , " delete"
and
.B show
(or
.B list
) objects, but some objects do not allow all of these operations
or have some additional commands.  The
.B help
command is available for all objects.  It prints
out a list of available commands and argument syntax conventions.
.sp
If no command is given, some default command is assumed.
Usually it is
.B list
or, if the objects of this class cannot be listed,
.BR "help" .

.SH bridge link - bridge port

.B link
objects correspond to the port devices of the bridge.

.P
The corresponding commands set and display port status and bridge specific
attributes.

.SS bridge link set - set bridge specific attributes on a port

.TP
.BI dev " NAME "
interface name of the bridge port

.TP
.BI cost " COST "
the STP path cost of the specified port.

.TP
.BI priority " PRIO "
the STP port priority.  The priority value is an unsigned 8-bit quantity
(number between 0 and 255).  This metric is used in the designated port an
droot port selectio algorithms.

.TP
.BI state " STATE "
the operation state of the port.  This is primarily used by user space STP/RSTP
implementation.  The following is a list of valid values:

.B 0
- port is DISABLED.  Make this port completely inactive.
.sp

.B 1
- STP LISTENING state.  Only valid if STP is enabled on the brige.  In this
state the port for list for STP BPDUs and drop all other traffic.
.sp

.B 2
- STP LEARNING state.  Only valid if STP is enabled on the bridge.  In this
state the port will accept traffic only for the purpose of updating MAC
adress tables.
.sp

.B 3
- STP FORWARDING state.  Port is fully active.
.sp

.B 4
- STP BLOCKING state.  Only valid if STP is enabled on the bridge.  This state
is used during the STP election process.  In this state, port will only process
STP BPDUs.
.sp

.TP
.BR "guard on " or " guard off "
Controls whether STP BPUDs will be processed by the bridge port.  By default,
the flag is turned off allowed BPDU processing.  Turning this flag on will
cause the port to stop processing STP BPDUs.

.TP
.BR "hairpin on " or " hairpin off "
Controls whether traffic may be send back out of the port on which it was
received.  By default, this flag is turned off and the bridge will not forward
traffic back out of the receiving port.

.TP
.BR "fastleave on " or " fastleave off "
This flag allows the bridge to immediately stop multicast traffic on a port
that receives IGMP Leave message.  It is only used with IGMP snooping is
enabled on the bridge.  By default the flag is off.

.TP
.BR "root_block on " or " root_block off "
Controls whether a given port is allowed to become root port or not.  Only used
when STP is enabled on the bridge.  By default the flag is off.

.TP
.BR "learning on " or " learning off "
Controls whether a given port will learn MAC addresses from received traffic or
not.  If learning if off, the bridge will end up flooding any traffic for which
it has no FDB entry.  By default this flag is on.

.TP
.BR "learning_sync on " or " learning_sync off "
Controls whether a given port will sync MAC addresses learned on device port to
bridge FDB.

.TP
.BR "flooding on " or " flooding off "
Controls whether a given port will flood unicast traffic for which there is no FDB entry.  By default this flag is on.

.TP
.BI hwmode
Some network interface cards support HW bridge functionality and they may be
configured in different modes.  Currently support modes are:

.B vepa
- Data sent between HW ports is sent on the wire to the external
switch.

.B veb
- bridging happens in hardware.

.SS bridge link show - list bridge port configuration.

This command displays the current bridge port configuration and flags.

.SH bridge fdb - forwarding database management

.B fdb
objects contain known Ethernet addresses on a  link.

.P
The corresponding commands display fdb entries, add new entries,
append entries,
and delete old ones.

.SS bridge fdb add - add a new fdb entry

This command creates a new fdb entry.

.TP
.BI "LLADDR"
the Ethernet MAC address.

.TP
.BI dev " DEV"
the interface to which this address is associated.

.B self
- the address is associated with a software fdb (default)
.sp

.B embedded
- the address is associated with an offloaded fdb
.sp

.B router
- the destination address is associated with a router.
Valid if the referenced device is a VXLAN type device and has
route shortcircuit enabled.
.sp

.in -8
The next command line parameters apply only
when the specified device
.I DEV
is of type VXLAN.
.TP
.BI dst " IPADDR"
the IP address of the destination
VXLAN tunnel endpoint where the Ethernet MAC ADDRESS resides.

.TP
.BI vni " VNI"
the VXLAN VNI Network Identifier (or VXLAN Segment ID)
to use to connect to the remote VXLAN tunnel endpoint.
If omitted the value specified at vxlan device creation
will be used.

.TP
.BI port " PORT"
the UDP destination PORT number to use to connect to the
remote VXLAN tunnel endpoint.
If omitted the default value is used.

.TP
.BI via " DEVICE"
device name of the outgoing interface for the
VXLAN device driver to reach the
remote VXLAN tunnel endpoint. 

.SS bridge fdb append - append a forwarding database entry
This command adds a new fdb entry with an already known
.IR LLADDR .
Valid only for multicast link layer addresses.
The command adds support for broadcast and multicast
Ethernet MAC addresses.
The Ethernet MAC address is added multiple times into
the forwarding database and the vxlan device driver
sends a copy of the data packet to each entry found.

.PP
The arguments are the same as with
.BR "bridge fdb add" ,

.SS bridge fdb delete - delete a forwarding database entry
This command removes an existing fdb entry.

.PP
The arguments are the same as with
.BR "bridge fdb add" ,

.SS bridge fdb show - list forwarding entries.

This command displays the current forwarding table.

.PP
With the
.B -statistics
option, the command becomes verbose.  It prints out the last updated
and last used time for each entry.

.SH bridge mdb - multicast group database management

.B mdb
objects contain known IP multicast group addresses on a link.

.P
The corresponding commands display mdb entries, add new entries,
and delete old ones.

.SS bridge mdb add - add a new multicast group database entry

This command creates a new mdb entry.

.TP
.BI dev " DEV"
the interface where this group address is associated.

.TP
.BI port " PORT"
the port whose link is known to have members of this multicast group.

.TP
.BI grp " GROUP"
the IP multicast group address whose members reside on the link connected to
the port.

.B permanent
- the mdb entry is permanent
.sp

.B temp
- the mdb entry is temporary (default)
.sp

.in -8
.SS bridge mdb delete - delete a multicast group database entry
This command removes an existing mdb entry.

.PP
The arguments are the same as with
.BR "bridge mdb add" .

.SS bridge mdb show - list multicast group database entries

This command displays the current multicast group membership table. The table
is populated by IGMP and MLD snooping in the bridge driver automatically. It
can be altered by
.B bridge mdb add
and
.B bridge mdb del
commands manually too.

.TP
.BI dev " DEV"
the interface only whose entries should be listed. Default is to list all
bridge interfaces.

.PP
With the
.B -details
option, the command becomes verbose.  It prints out the ports known to have
a connected router.

.SH bridge vlan - VLAN filter list

.B vlan
objects contain known VLAN IDs for a link.

.P
The corresponding commands display vlan filter entries, add new entries,
and delete old ones.

.SS bridge vlan add - add a new vlan filter entry

This command creates a new vlan filter entry.

.TP
.BI dev " NAME"
the interface with which this vlan is associated.

.TP
.BI vid " VID"
the VLAN ID that identifies the vlan.

.TP
.BI pvid
the vlan specified is to be considered a PVID at ingress.
Any untagged frames will be assigned to this VLAN.

.TP
.BI untagged
the vlan specified is to be treated as untagged on egress.

.TP
.BI self
the vlan is configured on the specified physical device.  Required if the
device is the bridge device.

.TP
.BI master
the vlan is configured on the software bridge (default).

.SS bridge vlan delete - delete a forwarding database entry
This command removes an existing fdb entry.

.PP
The arguments are the same as with
.BR "bridge vlan add".
The
.BR "pvid " and " untagged"
flags are ignored.

.SS bridge vlan show - list vlan configuration.

This command displays the current VLAN filter table.

.SH bridge monitor - state monitoring

The
.B bridge
utility can monitor the state of devices and  addresses
continuously.  This option has a slightly different format.
Namely, the
.B monitor
command is the first in the command line and then the object list follows:

.BR "bridge monitor" " [ " all " |"
.IR OBJECT-LIST " ]"

.I OBJECT-LIST
is the list of object types that we want to monitor.
It may contain
.BR link ",  " fdb ", and " mdb "."
If no
.B file
argument is given,
.B bridge
opens RTNETLINK, listens on it and dumps state changes in the format
described in previous sections.

.P
If a file name is given, it does not listen on RTNETLINK,
but opens the file containing RTNETLINK messages saved in binary format
and dumps them.  Such a history file can be generated with the


.SH NOTES
This command uses facilities added in Linux 3.0.

Although the forwarding table is maintained on a per-bridge device basis
the bridge device is not part of the syntax. This is a limitation of the
underlying netlink neighbour message protocol. When displaying the
forwarding table, entries for all bridges are displayed.
Add/delete/modify commands determine the underlying bridge device
based on the bridge to which the corresponding ethernet device is attached.


.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ip (8)
.SH BUGS
.RB "Please direct bugreports and patches to: " <netdev@vger.kernel.org>

.SH AUTHOR
Original Manpage by Stephen Hemminger
