.TH IP\-ADDRLABEL 8 "20 Dec 2011" "iproute2" "Linux"
.SH "NAME"
ip-addrlabel \- protocol address label management
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.sp
.ad l
.in +8
.ti -8
.B ip
.RI "[ " OPTIONS " ]" 
.B addrlabel 
.RI " { " COMMAND " | "
.BR help " }"
.sp

.ti -8
.IR OPTIONS " := { "
\fB\-V\fR[\fIersion\fR] |
\fB\-s\fR[\fItatistics\fR] |
\fB\-r\fR[\fIesolve\fR] |
\fB\-f\fR[\fIamily\fR] {
.BR inet " | " inet6 " | " ipx " | " dnet " | " link " } | "
\fB\-o\fR[\fIneline\fR] }

.ti -8
.BR "ip addrlabel" " { " add " | " del " } " prefix
.BR PREFIX " [ "
.B dev
.IR DEV " ] [ "
.B label
.IR NUMBER " ]"

.ti -8
.BR "ip addrlabel" " { " list " | " flush " }"

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
IPv6 address labels are used for address selection;
they are described in RFC 3484.  Precedence is managed by userspace,
and only the label itself is stored in the kernel.

.SS ip addrlabel add - add an address label
add an address label entry to the kernel.
.TP
.BI prefix " PREFIX"
.TP
.BI dev " DEV"
the outgoing interface.
.TP
.BI label " NUMBER"
the label for the prefix.
0xffffffff is reserved.
.SS ip addrlabel del - delete an address label
delete an address label entry from the kernel.
.B Arguments:
coincide with the arguments of
.B ip addrlabel add
but the label is not required.
.SS ip addrlabel list - list address labels
list the current address label entries in the kernel.
.SS ip addrlabel flush - flush address labels
flush all address labels in the kernel. This does not restore any default settings.

.SH SEE ALSO
.br
.BR ip (8)

.SH AUTHOR
Manpage by Yoshifuji Hideaki / 吉藤英明

