.TH IP\-NTABLE 8 "20 Dec 2011" "iproute2" "Linux"
.SH "NAME"
ip-ntable - neighbour table configuration
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.sp
.ad l
.in +8
.ti -8
.B ip
.RI "[ " OPTIONS " ]"
.B address
.RI " { " COMMAND " | "
.BR help " }"
.sp

.ti -8
.BR "ip ntable change name"
.IR NAME " [ "
.B dev
.IR DEV " ] " PARMS

.ti -8
.IR PARMS " := { "
.B thresh1
.IR VAL " | "
.B thresh2
.IR VAL " | "
.B thresh3
.IR VAL " | "
.B gc_int
.IR MSEC " | "
.B base_reachable
.IR MSEC " | "
.B retrans
.IR MSEC " | " "gc_stale MSEC " " | "
.B delay_probe
.IR MSEC " | " "queue LEN " " | "
.B app_probs
.IR VAL " | "
.B ucast_probes
.IR VAL " | " "mcast_probes VAL " " | "
.B anycast_delay
.IR MSEC " | "
.B proxy_delay
.IR MSEC " | " "proxy_queue LEN " " | "
.B locktime
.IR MSEC " }"

.ti -8
.BR "ip ntable show" " [ "
.B dev
.IR DEV " ] [ "
.B name
.IR NAME " ]"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I ip ntable
controls the parameters for the neighbour tables. 

.SS ip ntable show - list the ip neighbour tables

This commands displays neighbour table parameters and statistics.

.TP
.BI dev " DEV"
only list the table attached to this device.

.TP
.BI name " NAME"
only lists the table with the given name.

.SS ip ntable change - modify table parameter

This command allows modifying table parameters such as timers and queue lengths.
.TP
.BI name " NAME"
the name of the table to modify.

.TP
.BI dev " DEV"
the name of the device to modify the table values.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
ip ntable show dev eth0
.RS 4
Shows the neighbour table (IPv4 ARP and IPv6 ndisc) parameters on device eth0.
.RE
.PP
ip ntable change name arp_cache queue 8 dev eth0
.RS 4
Changes the number of packets queued while address is being resolved from the
default value (3) to 8 packets.
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.br
.BR ip (8)

.SH AUTHOR
Manpage by Stephen Hemminger 
