.TH IP\-TOKEN 8 "28 Mar 2013" "iproute2" "Linux"
.SH "NAME"
ip-token \- tokenized interface identifier support
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.sp
.ad l
.in +8
.ti -8
.B ip token
.RI " { " COMMAND " | "
.BR help " }"
.sp

.ti -8
.BR "ip token" " { " set " } "
.IR TOKEN
.B dev
.IR DEV

.ti -8
.BR "ip token" " { " get " } "
.B dev
.IR DEV

.ti -8
.BR "ip token" " { " list " }"

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
IPv6 tokenized interface identifier support is used for assigning well-known
host-part addresses to nodes whilst still obtaining a global network prefix
from Router advertisements. The primary target for tokenized identifiers are
server platforms where addresses are usually manually configured, rather than
using DHCPv6 or SLAAC. By using tokenized identifiers, hosts can still
determine their network prefix by use of SLAAC, but more readily be
automatically renumbered should their network prefix change [1]. Tokenized
IPv6 Identifiers are described in the draft
[1]: <draft-chown-6man-tokenised-ipv6-identifiers-02>.

.SS ip token set - set an interface token
set the interface token to the kernel. Once a token is set, it cannot be
removed from the interface, only overwritten.
.TP
.I TOKEN
the interface identifier token address.
.TP
.BI dev " DEV"
the networking interface.

.SS ip token get - get the interface token from the kernel
show a tokenized interface identifier of a particular networking device.
.B Arguments:
coincide with the arguments of
.B ip token set
but the
.I TOKEN
must be left out.
.SS ip token list - list all interface tokens
list all tokenized interface identifiers for the networking interfaces from
the kernel.

.SH SEE ALSO
.br
.BR ip (8)

.SH AUTHOR
Manpage by Daniel Borkmann
