.TH NTFSCK 8 "October 2012" "Tuxera NTFS Utilities 3014.5.21"
.SH NAME
ntfsck \- check and repair an NTFS file system 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ntfsck
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ntfsck
will check and repair an NTFS file system located on
.IR device
or an NTFS image file.
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that
.B ntfsck
accepts. Nearly all options have two equivalent names. The short name is
preceded by
.B \-
and the long name is preceded by
.BR \-\- .
Any single letter options, that don't take an argument, can be combined into a
single command, e.g.
.B \-fv
is equivalent to
.BR "\-f \-v" .
Long named options can be abbreviated to any unique prefix of their name.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-automatic\-repair\fR
Repair the volume if it appears to be in need of a repair. This options makes
.B ntfsck
exit immediately if the volume appears to be in order (no dirty flag set,
logfile clean, no hibernated Windows session, ...), but otherwise a full repair
is performed.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-fast\-check\fR
Check if volume is dirty then exit. If the volume is dirty then the exit value 
will be 100.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-no\-progress\-bar\fR
Don't show progress bars.
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-no\-alloc\-check\fR
Don't check cluster allocations. This option speeds up 
.B ntfsck.
Use this option with caution.
.TP
\fB\-O\fR, \fB\-\-no\-orpan\-check\fR
Don't check for orphaned files. This option speeds up 
.B ntfsck.
.TP
\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-no\-mft\-scan\fR
Don't scan $MFT. This option typically slows down 
.B ntfsck.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-no\-sync\fR
Don't sync NTFS metadata before exit. This option speeds up 
.B ntfsck
however it's safe to use only if device is not removed/ejected.
.TP
\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-file\fR FILE
Check and repair FILE only. FILE is absolute path to a file or directory.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-inode\fR NUMBER
Correct inode NUMBER only and its children.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-force\fR
This will override some sensible defaults. Use this option with caution.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Show a list of options with a brief description of each one.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Show the version number of
.BR ntfsck .
.SH EXIT CODE
The exit code returned by
.B ntfsck
is one of the followings:
.br
\       0\      \-\ No errors or file system was successfully repaired
.br
\       1\      \-\ File system errors could not be corrected
.br
\       23\     \-\ Volume is read-only 
.br
\       100\    \-\ Volume is dirty, needs check (\-\-fast-check was used) 
.br
.SH BUGS
If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to
ntfs-support@tuxera.com. 
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B ntfsck
is part of the
.B Tuxera NTFS
package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkntfs (8)
