The contrib/ directory contains small tools that might be useful for using
with Tor.  A few of them are included in the Tor source distribution; you can
find the others in the main Tor repository.  We don't guarantee that they're
particularly useful.

dirauth-tools/ -- Tools useful for directory authority administrators
---------------------------------------------------------------------

add-tor is an old script to manipulate the approved-routers file.

nagios-check-tor-authority-cert is a nagios script to check when Tor
authority certificates are expired or nearly expired.

client-tools/ -- Tools for use with Tor clients
-----------------------------------------------

torify is a small wrapper script around torsocks.

tor-resolve.py uses Tor's SOCKS port extensions to perform DNS lookups.  You
should probably use src/tools/tor-resolve instead.

dist/ -- Scripts and files for use when packaging Tor
-----------------------------------------------------

torctl, rc.subr, and tor.sh are init scripts for use with SysV-style init
tools.  Everybody likes to write init scripts differently, it seems.

tor.service is a sample service file for use with systemd.

The suse/ subdirectory contains files used by the suse distribution.

operator-tools/ -- Tools for Tor relay operators
------------------------------------------------

tor-exit-notice.html is an HTML file for use with the DirPortFrontPage
option.  It tells visitors that your relay is a Tor exit node, and that they
shouldn't assume you're the origin for the traffic that you're delivering.

tor.logrotate is a configuration file for use with the logrotate tool.  You
may need to edit it to work for you.

linux-tor-prio.sh uses Linux iptables tools to traffic-shape your Tor relay's
traffic. If it breaks, you get to keep both pieces.

or-tools/ -- Tools for interacting with relays
----------------------------------------------

checksocks.pl is a tool to scan relays to see if any of them have advertised
public SOCKS ports, so we can tell them not to.

check-tor is a quick shell script to try doing a TLS handshake with a router
or to try fetching a directory from it.

exitlist is a precursor of check.torproject.org: it parses a bunch of cached
server descriptors to determine which can connect to a given address:port.

win32build -- Old files for windows packaging
---------------------------------------------

You shouldn't need these unless you're building some of the older Windows
packages.
