.TH OSPFD 8 "25 November 2004" "Quagga OSPFv2 daemon" "Version 0.97.3"
.SH NAME
ospfd \- an OSPFv2 routing engine for use with Quagga routing software.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ospfd
[
.B \-dhlv
] [
.B \-f
.I config-file
] [
.B \-i
.I pid-file
] [
.B \-P
.I port-number
] [
.B \-A
.I vty-address
] [
.B \-u
.I user
] [
.B \-g
.I group
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ospfd
is a routing component that works with the
.B Quagga
routing engine.
.SH OPTIONS
Options available for the
.B ospfd
command:
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Runs in daemon mode, forking and exiting from tty.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-config-file \fR\fIconfig-file\fR 
Specifies the config file to use for startup. If not specified this
option will likely default to \fB\fI/usr/local/etc/ospfd.conf\fR.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-group \fR\fIgroup\fR
Specify the group to run as. Default is \fIquagga\fR.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
A brief message.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-pid_file \fR\fIpid-file\fR
When ospfd starts its process identifier is written to
\fB\fIpid-file\fR.  The init system uses the recorded PID to stop or
restart ospfd.  The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/ospfd.pid\fR.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-vty_port \fR\fIport-number\fR 
Specify the port that the ospfd VTY will listen on. This defaults to
2604, as specified in \fB\fI/etc/services\fR.
.TP
\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-vty_addr \fR\fIvty-address\fR
Specify the address that the ospfd VTY will listen on. Default is all
interfaces.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-user \fR\fIuser\fR
Specify the user to run as. Default is \fIquagga\fR.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-apiserver \fR
Enable OSPF apiserver. Default is disabled.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version and exit.
.SH FILES
.TP
.BI /usr/local/sbin/ospfd
The default location of the 
.B ospfd
binary.
.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/ospfd.conf
The default location of the 
.B ospfd
config file.
.TP
.BI $(PWD)/ospfd.log 
If the 
.B ospfd
process is config'd to output logs to a file, then you will find this
file in the directory where you started \fBospfd\fR.
.SH WARNING
This man page is intended to be a quick reference for command line
options. The definitive document is the Info file \fBQuagga\fR.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The ospfd process may log to standard output, to a VTY, to a log
file, or through syslog to the system logs. \fBospfd\fR supports many
debugging options, see the Info file, or the source for details.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR bgpd (8),
.BR ripd (8),
.BR ripngd (8),
.BR ospf6d (8),
.BR isisd (8),
.BR zebra (8),
.BR vtysh (1)
.SH BUGS
.B ospfd
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try
.BI http://bugzilla.quagga.net
.SH AUTHORS
See
.BI http://www.zebra.org
and
.BI http://www.quagga.net
or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.

