.TH PIM 8 "10 December 2008" "Quagga PIM daemon" "Version 0.99.11"
.SH NAME
pimd \- a PIM routing for use with Quagga Routing Suite.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pimd
[
.B \-dhvZ
] [
.B \-f
.I config-file
] [
.B \-i
.I pid-file
] [
.B \-z
.I path
] [
.B \-P
.I port-number
] [
.B \-A
.I vty-address
] [
.B \-u
.I user
] [
.B \-g
.I group
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pimd
is a protocol-independent multicast component that works with the
.B Quagga
Routing Suite.
.SH OPTIONS
Options available for the
.B pimd
command:
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Runs in daemon mode, forking and exiting from tty.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-config-file \fR\fIconfig-file\fR 
Specifies the config file to use for startup. If not specified this
option will likely default to \fB\fI/usr/local/etc/pimd.conf\fR.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-group \fR\fIgroup\fR
Specify the group to run as. Default is \fIquagga\fR.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
A brief message.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-pid_file \fR\fIpid-file\fR
When pimd starts its process identifier is written to
\fB\fIpid-file\fR.  The init system uses the recorded PID to stop or
restart pimd.  The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/pimd.pid\fR.
.TP
\fB\-z\fR, \fB\-\-socket \fR\fIpath\fR
Specify the socket path for contacting the zebra daemon.
The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/zserv.api\fR.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-vty_port \fR\fIport-number\fR 
Specify the port that the pimd VTY will listen on. This defaults to
2611, as specified in \fB\fI/etc/services\fR.
.TP
\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-vty_addr \fR\fIvty-address\fR
Specify the address that the pimd VTY will listen on. Default is all
interfaces.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-user \fR\fIuser\fR
Specify the user to run as. Default is \fIquagga\fR.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version and exit.
.TP
\fB\-Z\fR, \fB\-\-debug_zclient\fR
Enable logging information for zclient debugging.
.SH FILES
.TP
.BI /usr/local/sbin/pimd
The default location of the 
.B pimd
binary.
.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/pimd.conf
The default location of the 
.B pimd
config file.
.TP
.BI /var/run/pimd.pid
The default location of the 
.B pimd
pid file.
.TP
.BI /var/run/zserv.api
The default location of the 
.B zebra
unix socket file.
.TP
.BI $(PWD)/pimd.log 
If the 
.B pimd
process is config'd to output logs to a file, then you will find this
file in the directory where you started \fBpimd\fR.
.SH WARNING
This man page is intended to be a quick reference for command line
options.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The pimd process may log to standard output, to a VTY, to a log
file, or through syslog to the system logs.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR zebra (8),
.BR vtysh (1)
.SH BUGS
\fBpimd\fR is in early development at the moment and is not ready for
production use.

.B pimd
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try
.BI https://github.com/udhos/qpimd
.SH AUTHORS
See
.BI https://github.com/udhos/qpimd
for an accurate list of authors.

