.TH VTYSH 1 "27 July 2006" "Quagga VTY shell" "Version 0.96.5"
.SH NAME
vtysh \- a integrated shell for Quagga routing software
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vtysh
[
.B \-b
]
.br
.B vtysh
[
.B \-E
] [
.B \-d
.I daemon
]
] [
.B \-c
.I command
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vtysh
is a integrated shell for
.B Quagga
routing engine.
.SH OPTIONS
Options available for the
.B vtysh
command:
.IP "\fB\-b, \-\-boot\fP"
Execute boot startup configuration. It makes sense only if integrated config
file is in use (not default in Quagga). See Info file \fBQuagga\fR for more
info.
.IP "\fB\-c, \-\-command \fIcommand\fP"
Specify command to be executed under batch mode. It behaves like -c option in
any other shell -
.I command
is executed and
.B vtysh
exits.

It's useful for gathering info from Quagga routing software or reconfiguring
daemons from inside shell scripts, etc.
Note that multiple commands may be executed by using more than one
-c option and/or embedding linefeed characters inside the
.I command
string.
.IP "\fB\-d, \-\-daemon \fIdaemon_name\fP"
Specify which daemon to connect to.  By default,
.B vtysh
attempts to connect to all Quagga daemons running on the system.  With this
flag, one can specify a single daemon to connect to instead.  For example,
specifying '-d ospfd' will connect only to ospfd.  This can be particularly
useful inside scripts with -c where the command is targeted for a single daemon.
.IP "\fB\-e, \-\-execute \fIcommand\fP"
Alias for -c. It's here only for compatibility with Zebra routing software and
older Quagga versions. This will be removed in future.
.IP "\fB\-E, \-\-echo\fP"
When the -c option is being used, this flag will cause the standard
.B vtysh
prompt and command to be echoed prior to displaying the results.
This is particularly useful to separate the results
when executing multiple commands.
.IP "\fB\-h, \-\-help\fP"
Display a usage message on standard output and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.IP "\fBVTYSH_PAGER\fR"
This should be the name of the pager to use. Default is \fBmore\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/vtysh.conf
The default location of the 
.B vtysh
config file.
.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/Quagga.conf
The default location of the integrated Quagga routing engine config file
if integrated config file is in use (not default).
.SH WARNING
This man page is intended to be a quick reference for command line
options. The definitive document is the Info file \fBQuagga\fR.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR bgpd (8),
.BR ripd (8),
.BR ripngd (8),
.BR ospfd (8),
.BR ospf6d (8),
.BR isisd (8),
.BR zebra (8)
.SH BUGS
.B vtysh
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try 
.BI http://bugzilla.quagga.net
.SH AUTHORS
See
.BI http://www.zebra.org
and
.BI http://www.quagga.net
or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.

