.TH SDPARM "8" "October 2007" "sdparm\-1.02" SDPARM
.SH NAME
sdparm \- access SCSI modes pages; read VPD pages; send simple SCSI commands.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sdparm
[\fI\-\-all\fR] [\fI\-\-clear=STR\fR] [\fI\-\-command=CMD\fR]
[\fI\-\-dbd\fR] [\fI\-\-defaults\fR] [\fI\-\-dummy\fR] [\fI\-\-flexible\fR]
[\fI\-\-get=STR\fR] [\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-hex\fR] [\fI\-\-inquiry\fR]
[\fI\-\-long\fR] [\fI\-\-num\-desc\fR] [\fI\-\-page=PG[,SPG]\fR]
[\fI\-\-quiet\fR] [\fI\-\-save\fR] [\fI\-\-set=STR\fR] [\fI\-\-six\fR]
[\fI\-\-transport=TN\fR] [\fI\-\-vendor=VN\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR]
[\fI\-\-version\fR] \fIDEVICE\fR
.PP
.B sdparm
\fI\-\-enumerate\fR [\fI\-\-all\fR] [\fI\-\-inquiry\fR] [\fI\-\-long\fR]
[\fI\-\-page=PG[,SPG]\fR] [\fI\-\-transport=TN\fR] [\fI\-\-vendor=VN\fR]
.PP
.B sdparm
\fI\-\-wscan\fR [\fI\-\-verbose\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
This utility fetches and potentially changes SCSI device (e.g.
disk) mode pages. Inquiry data including Vital Product Data (VPD)
pages can also be displayed. Commands associated with starting
and stopping the medium; loading and unloading the medium; and
other housekeeping function may also be issued by this utility.
.PP
Of the three invocations shown in the synopsis, the first is the
most general. The second variant that uses \fI\-\-enumerate\fR is
for dumping information held in sdparm's internal tables. The last
variant is for Windows only and lists the available device names;
see the OPTIONS entry for \fI\-\-wscan\fR. 
.PP
If no options (other than \fIDEVICE\fR) are given then a selection of
common mode page fields for that device are listed. If the \fI\-\-long\fR
option is also given then a description of the fields is placed on the
right of each line. If the \fI\-\-all\fR option is given then all known
mode page fields for that device are listed. Individual fields can be
displayed with the \fI\-\-get=STR\fR option (e.g. '\-\-get=WCE' to fetch
the state of the Writeback Cache Enable field).
.PP
By default this utility shows mode pages that are common to all
transport protocols. These are termed as "generic" mode pages.
If there is no match on a generic mode page name or field then
those pages specific to the SAS transport are checked.
Transport protocol specific mode pages are selected with
the \fI\-\-transport=TN\fR option. See the TRANSPORT section below.
Vendor specific mode pages are selected with the \fI\-\-vendor=VN\fR option.
See the VENDORS section below.
.PP
Although originally for SCSI disks (or storage devices that appear to the
OS as SCSI disks) many of the mode pages are for other SCSI device types.
These include CD/DVD players that use the ATAPI (or any other) transport,
SCSI tapes drives and SCSI enclosures.
.PP
When the \fI\-\-inquiry\fR option is given without a page number then the
Device Identification VPD page (page number 0x83) is requested and
if found it is decoded and output. If no page number is given and
the \fI\-\-all\fR option is given then a list of VPD page names (but not
their contents) supported by the \fIDEVICE\fR is output. When both
the \fI\-\-inquiry\fR and \fI\-\-page=PG\fR options are given then
the VPD page can be specified as an abbreviation (e.g. "sp" for the SCSI
ports VPD page) or numerically (e.g. "0x88"). If a VPD page is returned
by the \fIDEVICE\fR but sdparm cannot decode it or the \fI\-\-hex\fR
option is given then it is output in hex.
.PP
This utility completes with an exit status of 0 when successful. For other
values see the EXIT STATUS section below.
.SH OPTIONS
Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
If an option takes a numeric argument then that argument is assumed to
be decimal unless otherwise indicated (e.g. with a leading "0x" or a
trailing "h"). The options are in alphabetical order, based on the long
option name.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-all\fR
output all recognized fields for the device type (e.g. disk) of the
\fIDEVICE\fR. Without this option (or the \fI\-\-page=PG[,SPG]\fR option) the
default action is to output a relatively small number of commonly used fields
from different pages. When a specific (mode) page number is given with the
\fI\-\-page=PG[,SPG]\fR option then all the fields of that page are
output (irrespective of the setting of this option). For this option's action
when used with the \fI\-\-enumerate\fR option see the ENUMERATE section below.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-clear\fR=\fISTR\fR
In its simplest form \fISTR\fR contains a field acronym_name or a field
numerical descriptor. In the absence of an explicit value
argument (e.g. '\-\-clear=WCE=1'), the field has its value cleared to zero.
See the PARAMETERS section below.
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-command\fR=\fICMD\fR
Perform given \fICMD\fR. See section below on COMMANDS. To enumerate supported
commands use '\-e \-C x' (using any CMD name, valid or otherwise).
.TP
\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-dbd\fR
disable block descriptors. This is a bit in MODE SENSE cdbs that
rarely needs to be set. One known case is a MODE SENSE 6 issued to a
Reduced Block Commands (RBC) device where the RBC standard says it
shall be set.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-defaults\fR
sets the given mode page to its default values. Requires the 
\fI\-\-page=PG[,SPG]\fR option to be given to specify the mode page. To make
the default mode page values also the saved mode page values, use the
\fI\-\-save\fR option as well.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-dummy\fR
when set inhibits changes being placed in the \fIDEVICE\fR's mode page.
Instead the mode data that would have been sent to a MODE SELECT
command, is output in ASCII hex to the console. This option is mainly
for testing.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-enumerate\fR
lists out descriptive information about the pages and fields known to this
utility. Ignores the \fIDEVICE\fR argument and other options apart from
the \fI\-\-all\fR, \fI\-\-inquiry\fR, \fI\-\-long\fR, \fI\-\-page=PG[,SPG]\fR,
\fI\-\-transport=TN\fR and \fI\-\-vendor=VN\fR. If \fI\-\-enumerate\fR is
given without other options then the known (generic) mode pages are listed.
See the ENUMERATE section below.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-flexible\fR
Some devices, bridges and/or drivers attempt crude transformations between
mode sense 6 and 10 byte commands without correctly rebuilding the response.
This will cause the response to be mis\-interpreted (usually with an
error saying the response is malformed). With this option, the length
of the response is checked, and if it looks wrong, various corrections
are attempted. This option will also allow mode pages that don't belong
to the current device's peripheral type to be listed.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-get\fR=\fISTR\fR
In its simplest form \fISTR\fR contains a field acronym_name or a field
numerical descriptor. The field is fetched from mode page. See the PARAMETERS
section below. The \fI\-\-long\fR and \fI\-\-hex\fR options effect the output
format. Also if a value of "1" is given (e.g. '\-\-get=WCE=1') only the
current value is output (i.e. not the change mask, the default value and the
saved value).
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
output the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-hex\fR
rather than trying to decode mode (or VPD) pages, print them out in
hex. When used with the \fI\-\-get=STR\fR option the corresponding current,
changeable, default and saved values are output in hex, prefixed by "0x"
and space separated. If a value of "1" is given with the \fI\-\-get=STR\fR
option (e.g. '\-\-get=WCE=1') then only the current value is output in hex,
prefixed by "0x". If a value of "2" is given with the \fI\-\-get=STR\fR
option then only the current value is output as a (signed) integer. This
option can be used multiple times (e.g. '\-HH'). Useful with the ATA
Information VPD page which usually outputs its IDENTIFY (PACKET) DEVICE
response in 16 bit hex words; with '\-HH' outputs that response in hex
bytes; with '\-HHH' outputs the same response in a format suitable
for 'hdparm \-\-Istdin' to decode.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-inquiry\fR
output INQUIRY VPD pages. In the absence of this option the default action
is to output mode pages. If the \fI\-\-inquiry\fR option is given without
the \fI\-\-page=PG[,SPG]\fR option then the device identification VPD
page (0x83) is decoded and output. If this option and the \fI\-\-all\fR
option are given then the supported VPD pages page (0x0) is decoded and
output.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-long\fR
output extra information. In the case of mode page fields a description (with
units if applicable) is output to the right. If used twice, then for some
fields more information about its values is given on one or more following
lines, each prefixed by a tab character. For usage with \fI\-\-enumerate\fR
see the ENUMERATE section below.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-num\-desc\fR
for a mode page that can have descriptors, the number of descriptors for the
given page on the \fIDEVICE\fR is output. Otherwise 0 is output.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-page\fR=\fIPG[,SPG]\fR
supply the page number (\fIPG\fR) and optionally the sub page
number (\fISPG\fR) of the mode (or VPD) page to fetch. These numbers are
interpreted as decimal unless prefixed with "0x" or a trailing. Sub page
numbers are only valid for mode pages (not VPD pages). Alternatively an
abbreviation for a page can be given (see next entry).
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-page\fR=\fISTR\fR
a two or three letter abbreviation for a page can be given. Known mode page
abbreviations are checked first followed by known VPD page abbreviations.
For example '\-\-page=ca' matches the caching mode page. If no match is found
then an error is issued and a list of possibilities in the current context
is given (so '\-p x' can be quite useful). If the \fISTR\fR matches a known
VPD page abbreviation then the \fI\-\-inquiry\fR option is assumed. For
usage with \fI\-\-enumerate\fR see the ENUMERATE section below.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
suppress output of device name followed by the vendor, product and revision
strings fetched from an INQUIRY response. Without this option such a line is
typically the first line output by sdparm. Reduces output from the device
identification VPD page, typically to one line (or none) for each of di_lu,
di_port, di_target and di_asis.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-save\fR
when a mode page is being modified (by using the \fI\-\-clear=STR\fR and/or
\fI\-\-set=STR\fR options) then the default action is to modify only the
current values mode page. When this option is given then the corresponding
value(s) in the saved values mode page is also changed. The next time the
device is power cycled (or reset) the saved values mode page becomes (i.e. is
copied to) the current values mode page. See NOTES section below.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-set\fR=\fISTR\fR
in its simplest form \fISTR\fR contains a field acronym_name or a field
numerical descriptor. In the absence of an explicit value, each acronym_name
has its value set to (all) ones. This means a 16 bit field will be set to
0xffff which is 65535 in decimal. Alternatively each acronym_name or numerical
descriptor may be followed by "=<n>" where <n> is the value to set that field
to. See the PARAMETERS section below.
.TP
\fB\-6\fR, \fB\-\-six\fR
The default action of this utility is to issue MODE SENSE and MODE SELECT
SCSI commands with 10 byte cdbs. When this option is given the 6 byte cdb
variants are used. RBC and old SCSI devices may need this option. This
utility outputs a suggestion to use this option if the SCSI status indicates
that the 10 byte cdb variant is not supported.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-transport\fR=\fITN\fR
Specifies the transport protocol where \fITN\fR is either a number in
the range 0 to 15 (inclusive) or an abbreviation (e.g. "fcp" for
the Fibre Channel Protocol). One way to list available transport protocols
numbers and their associated abbreviations is to give an invalid
transport protocol number such as '\-t x'; another way is '\-e \-l'.
.TP
\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-vendor\fR=\fIVN\fR
Specifies the vendor (i.e. manufacturer) where \fIVN\fR is either a number (0
or more) or an abbreviation (e.g. "sea" for Seagate disk vendor specific).
One way to list available vendor numbers and their associated abbreviations
is to give an invalid vendor number such as '\-M x'; another way is '\-e \-l'.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output). In some cases
more decoding is done (e.g. fields within a standard INQUIRY response).
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-wscan\fR
this option is available in Windows only. It lists the device names that are
available. In many cases there is more than one device name for a given
device. Attempts to group all device names for one device on a single
line (exceptions: USB and IEEE 1394 devices). See the "Win32 port" section
in the README file.
.SH NOTES
A mode page for which no abbreviation is known (e.g. a vendor specific mode
page) can be listed in hexadecimal by using the option
combination '\-\-page=PG \-\-hex'.
.PP
Numbers input to sdparm (e.g. in the command line arguments) are assumed
to be in decimal unless there is a hexadecimal indicator. A hexadecimal
indicator is either a leading '0x' or '0X' (i.e. the C language convention)
or a trailing 'h' or 'H' (i.e. the convention used at www.t10.org ). In
the case of \fI\-\-page\fR= either a string or number is expected, so hex
numbers like 'ch' (12) should be prefixed by a zero (e.g. '0ch').
.PP
The SPC\-4 draft (rev 2) says that devices that implement no
distinction between current and saved pages can return an
error (ILLEGAL REQUEST, invalid field in cdb) if the SP bit (which
corresponds to the \fI\-\-save\fR option) is _not_ set. In such cases
the \fI\-\-save\fR option needs to be given.
.PP
If the \fI\-\-save\fR option is given but the existing mode page indicates (via
its PS bit) that the page is not savable, then this utility generates
an error message. That message suggests to try again without the
\fI\-\-save\fR option.
.PP
Since the device identification VPD page (acronym_name "di") potentially
contains a lot of diverse designators, several associated acronyms are
available. They are "di_lu" for designators associated with the
addressed logical unit, "di_port" for designators associated with the
target port (which the command arrived via) and "di_target" for
designators associated with the target device. When "di" is used
designators are grouped by lu, then port and then target device.
To see all designators decoded in the order that they appear in the
VPD page use "di_asis".
.PP
In the linux kernel 2.6 series any device node that understands a SCSI
command set (e.g. SCSI disks and CD/DVD drives) may be specified. More
precisely the driver that "owns" the device node must support the SG_IO
ioctl. In the lk 2.4 series only SCSI generic (sg) device nodes support
the SG_IO ioctl. However in the lk 2.4 series other SCSI device nodes are
mapped within this utility to their corresponding sg device nodes. So if
there is a SCSI disk at /dev/sda then 'sdparm /dev/sda' will work in both
the lk 2.6 and lk 2.4 series. However if there is an ATAPI cd/dvd drive
at /dev/hdc then 'sdparm /dev/hdc' will only work in the lk 2.6 series.
.SH PARAMETERS
In their simplest form the \fI\-\-clear\fR=, \fI\-\-get\fR= and
\fI\-\-set\fR= options (or their short forms) take an acronym_name such
as "WCE". In the case of '\-\-get=WCE' the value of "Writeback Cache Enable"
in the caching mode page will be fetched. In the case of '\-\-set=WCE'
that bit will be set (to one). In the case of '\-\-clear=WCE' that bit
will be cleared (to zero). When an acronym_name is given then the mode page
is imputed from that acronym_name (e.g. WCE is in the caching mode page).
.PP
Instead of an acronym_name a field within a mode page can be described
numerically with a <start_byte>:<start_bit>:<num_bits> tuple. These
are the <start_byte> (origin 0) within the mode page, a <start_bit> (0 to
7 inclusive) and <num_bits> (1 to 64 inclusive). For example, the low level
representation of the RCD bit (the "Read Cache Disable bit in the caching
mode page) is "2:0:1". The <start_byte> can optionally be given in
hex (e.g. '\-\-set=0x2:0:1' or '\-\-set=2h:0:1'). With this form the
\fI\-\-page\fR= option is required to establish which mode page is to be
used.
.PP
Either form can optionally be followed by "=<val>". By default <val> is
decimal but can be given in hex in the normal fashion. Here are some
examples: '\-\-set=2h:0:1=1h' and '\-s MRIE=0x3'. When the acronym_name
or numeric form following \fI\-\-clear\fR= is not given an explicit '=<val>'
then the value defaults to zero. When the acronym_name or numeric form
following \fI\-\-set\fR= is not given an explicit '=<val>' then the value
defaults to "all ones" (i.e. as many as <num_bits> permits). For
example '\-\-clear=WCE' and '\-\-clear=WCE=0' have the same meaning: clear
Writeback Cache Enable or, put more simply: turn off the writeback cache.
.PP
Multiple fields within the same mode page can be changed by giving a comma
separated list of acronym_names and/or the numerical form. For
example: '\-\-set=TEST,MRIE=6'.
.PP
Some mode page have multiple descriptors. They typically have a fixed header
section at the start of the mode page that includes a field containing the
number of descriptors that follow. Following the header is a variable number
of descriptors. An example is the SAS Phy Control and Discover mode page. An
acronym_name may include a trailing '.<num>' where "<num>" is a descriptor
number (origin 0). For example '\-t sas \-g PHID.0' and '\-t sas \-g PHID'
will yield the phy identifier of the first descriptor of the above mode
page; '\-t sas \-g PHID.1' will yield the phy identifier of the second
descriptor.
.SH ENUMERATE
The \fI\-\-enumerate\fR option essentially dumps out static information held
by this utility. A list of \fI\-\-enumerate\fR variants and their actions
follows. For brevity subsequent examples of options are shown in their
shorter form.
.PP
    \-\-enumerate          list generic mode page information
.br
    \-e \-\-all             list generic mode page contents
.br
                         (i.e. parameters)
.br
    \-e \-\-page=rw         list contents of read write error
.br
                         recovery mode page
.br
    \-e \-\-inquiry         list VPD pages this utility can decode
.br
    \-e \-\-long            list generic mode pages, transport
.br
                         protocols, mode pages for each
.br
                         supported transport protocol and
.br
                         supported commands
.br
    \-e \-l \-\-all          additionally list the contents of
.br
                         each mode page
.br
    \-e \-\-transport=fcp   list mode pages for the fcp
.br
                         transport protocol
.br
    \-e \-t fcp \-\-all      additionally list the contents of
.br
                         each mode page
.br
    \-e \-\-vendor=sea      list vendor specific mode pages for
.br
                         "sea" (Seagate)
.br
    \-e \-M sea \-\-all      additionally list the contents of vendor
.br
                         specific mode pages for "sea" (Seagate)
.br
    \-e \-p pcd \-l         list contents of SAS phy control and
.br
                         discovery mode page plus (due to "\-l")
.br
                         some descfriptor format information
.PP
When known mode pages are listed (via the \fI\-\-enumerate \fR option) each
line starts with a two or three letter abbreviation. This is followed by
the page number (in hex prefixed by "0x") optionally followed by a
comma and the subpage number. Finally the descriptive name of the mode
page (e.g. as found in SPC\-4) is output.
.PP
When known parameters (fields) of a mode page are listed, each line
starts with an acronym (indented a few spaces). This will match (or
be an acronym for) the description for that field found in the (draft)
standards. Next are three numbers, separated by colons, surrounded by
brackets. These are the start byte (in hex, prefixed by "0x") of the
beginning of the field within the mode page; the starting bit (0 through 7
inclusive) and then the number of bits. The descriptive name of the
parameter (field) is then given. If appropriate the descriptive name
includes units (e.g. "(ms)" means the units are milliseconds). Adding
the '\-ll' option will list information about possible field values
for selected mode page parameters.
.PP
Mode parameters for which the num_bits is greater than 1 can be
viewed as unsigned integers. Often 16 and 32 bit fields are set
to 0xffff and 0xffffffff respectively (all ones) which usually
has a special meaning (see drafts). This utility outputs such values
as "\-1" to save space (rather than their unsigned integer
equivalents). "\-1" can also be given as the value to a mode page
field acronym (e.g. '\-\-set=INTT=\-1' sets the interval timer field
in the Informational Exceptions control mode page to 0xffffffff).
.SH TRANSPORTS
SCSI transport protocols are a relatively specialized area
that can be safely ignored by the majority of users.
.PP
Some transport protocols have protocol specific mode pages. These are usually
the disconnect\-reconnect (0x2), the protocol specific logical unit (0x18)
and the protocol specific port (0x19) mode pages. In some cases the latter
mode page has several subpages. The most common transport protocol
abbreviations likely to be used are "fcp", "spi" and "sas".
.PP
Many of the field names are re\-used in the same position so the acronym_name
namespaces have been divided between generic mode pages (i.e. when the
\fI\-\-transport\fR= option is _not_ given) and a namespace for each
transport protocol. A LUPID field from the protocol specific logical
unit (0x18) mode page and the PPID field from protocol specific
port (0x19) mode page are included in the generic modes pages; this is so
the respective (transport) protocol identifiers can be seen. In most cases
the user will know what the "port" transport is (i.e. the same transport as
the HBA in the computer) but the logical unit's transport could be different.
.SH VENDORS
SCSI leaves a lot of space for vendor specific information. Often this is
described in product manuals. The \fI\-\-vendor=VN\fR (or \fI\-M=VN\fR)
option allows known vendor specific mode pages to be examined and/or
modified by acronym.
.PP
In this utility the syntax and semantics of vendor specific
mode pages is very similar to those of transport protocol specific
mode pages. Both cannot be specified together. Vendor specific
modes pages can still be accessed numerically (as shown at the
end of the EXAMPLES section).
.SH COMMANDS
The command option sends a SCSI command to the \fIDEVICE\fR. If the
command fails then this is reflected in the non\-zero exit status.
To obtain more information about the error use the \fI\-v\fR option.
.PP
The 'capacity' command sends a READ CAPACITY command (valid for
disks and cd/dvd media). If successful yields "blocks: " [the number
of blocks], "block_length: " [typically either 512 or 2048]
and "capacity_mib: " [capacity in MibiBytes (1048576 byte units)].
.PP
The 'eject' command stops the medium and ejects it from the device.
Note that ejection (by command or button) may be prevented in which case
the 'unlock' command may be useful in extreme cases.
Typically only appropriate for cd/dvd drives and disk drives with removable
media. Objects if sent to another peripheral device type (but objection
can be overridden with '\-f' option).
.PP
The 'load' command loads the medium and and starts it (i.e. spins it up).
See 'eject' command for supported device types.
.PP
The 'ready' command sends the "Test Unit Ready" SCSI command to the
\fIDEVICE\fR. No error is reported if the device will respond to data
requests (e.g. READ) in a reasonable timescale. For example, if a disk
is stopped then it will report "not ready". All devices should respond
to this command.
.PP
The 'sense' command sends a REQUEST SENSE command. It reports a hardware
threshold exceeded, warning or low power condition if flagged. If a progress
indication is present (e.g. during a format) then it will be output as a
percentage. Yields a process status of 0 if the command succeeds and the
sense key is 0; else yields 1. The \fI\-\-quiet\fR option can be used to
lessen output, and \fI\-\-hex\fR to output sense data in hex.
.PP
The 'start' command starts the medium (i.e. spins it up). Harmless if
medium has already been started. See 'eject' command for supported device
types.
.PP
The 'stop' command stops the medium (i.e. spins it down). Harmless if
medium has already been stopped. See 'eject' command for supported device
types.
.PP
The 'sync' command sends a SYNCHRONIZE CACHE command. The device should
flush any data held in its (volatile) buffers to the media.
.PP
The 'unlock' command tells a device to allow medium removal. It uses
the SCSI "prevent allow medium removal" command. This is desperation stuff,
possibly overriding a prevention applied by the OS on a mounted file system.
The "eject" utility (from the "eject" package) is more graceful and should be
tried first. This command is only appropriate for devices with removable
media.
.PP
For loading and ejecting tapes the mt utility should be used (i.e. not
these commands). The 'ready' command is valid for tape devices.
.SH EXAMPLES
To list the common (generic) mode parameters of a disk:
.PP
   sdparm /dev/sda
.PP
To list the designators within the device identification VPD page
of a disk:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-inquiry /dev/sda
.PP
To see all parameters for the caching mode page:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-page=ca /dev/sda
.PP
To see all parameters for the caching mode page
with parameter descriptions to the right:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-page=ca \-\-long /dev/sda
.PP
To get the WCE values (current changeable default and saved) in hex:
.PP
   sdparm \-g WCE \-H /dev/sda
.br
0x01 0x00 0x01 0x01
.PP
To get the WCE current value in hex:
.PP
   sdparm \-g WCE=1 \-H /dev/sda
.br
0x01
.PP
To set the "Writeback Cache Enable" bit in the current values page:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-set=WCE /dev/sda
.PP
To set the "Writeback Cache Enable" bit in the current and saved values page:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-set=WCE \-\-save /dev/sda
.PP
To set the "Writeback Cache Enable" and clear "Read Cache Disable":
.PP
   sdparm \-\-set=WCE \-\-clear=RCD \-\-save /dev/sda
.PP
The previous example can also by written as:
.PP
   sdparm \-s WCE=1,RCD=0 \-S /dev/sda
.PP
To re\-establish the manufacturer's defaults in the current and saved
values of the caching mode page:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-page=ca \-\-defaults \-\-save /dev/sda
.PP
If an ATAPI cd/dvd drive is at /dev/hdc then its common (mode) parameters
could be listed in the lk 2.6 series with:
.PP
   sdparm /dev/hdc
.PP
If there is a DVD in the drive at /dev/hdc then it could be ejected in the
lk 2.6 series with:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-command=eject /dev/hdc
.PP
If the ejection is being prevented by software then that can be
overridden with:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-command=unlock /dev/hdc
.PP
One disk vendor has a "Performance Mode" bit (PM) in the vendor specific
unit attention mode page [0x0,0x0]. PM=0 is server mode (the default)
while PM=1 is desktop mode. Desktop mode can be set (both current and
saved values) with: 
.PP
   sdparm \-\-page=0 \-\-set=2:7:1=1 \-\-save /dev/sda
.PP
The resultant change can be viewed in hex with the \fI\-\-hex\fR option as
there are no acronyms for vendor extensions yet. The PM bit is now covered
by vendor specific mode pages and the above can also be accomplished with:
.PP
   sdparm \-\-vendor=sea \-\-set=PM \-\-save /dev/sda
.SH EXIT STATUS
To aid scripts that call sdparm, the exit status is set to indicate
success (0) or failure (1 or more). Note that some of the lower values
correspond to the SCSI sense key values. The exit status values are:
.TP
.B 0
success
.TP
.B 1
syntax error. Either illegal command line options, options with bad
arguments or a combination of options that is not permitted.
.TP
.B 2
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports that it is not ready for the operation
requested. The device may be in the process of becoming ready (e.g.
spinning up but not at speed) so the utility may work after a wait.
.TP
.B 3
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports a medium or hardware error (or a blank
check). For example an attempt to read a corrupted block on a disk
will yield this value.
.TP
.B 5
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports an "illegal request" with an additional
sense code other than "invalid operation code". This is often a
supported command with a field set requesting an unsupported
capability. For commands that require a "service action" field
this value can indicate that the command is not supported.
.TP
.B 6
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports a "unit attention" condition. This usually
indicates that something unrelated to the requested command has
occurred (e.g. a device reset) potentially before the current SCSI
command was sent. The requested command has not been executed by the
device. Note that unit attention conditions are usually only reported
once by a device.
.TP
.B 9
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports an illegal request with an additional
sense code of "invalid operation code" which means that it doesn't
support the requested command.
.TP
.B 11
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports an aborted command. In some cases aborted
commands can be retried immediately (e.g. if the transport aborted
the command due to congestion).
.TP
.B 15
the utility is unable to open, close or use the given \fIDEVICE\fR.
The given file name could be incorrect or there may be permission
problems. Adding the \fI\-v\fR option may give more information.
.TP
.B 20
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports it has a check condition but "no sense".
Some polling commands (e.g. REQUEST SENSE) can react this way.
It is unlikely that this value will occur as an exit status.
.TP
.B 21
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports a "recovered error". The requested command
was successful. Most likely a utility will report a recovered error
to stderr and continue, probably leaving the utility with an exit
status of 0 .
.TP
.B 33
the command sent to \fIDEVICE\fR has timed out. This occurs in Linux
only; in other ports a command timeout will appear as a transport (or OS)
error.
.TP
.B 97
the response to a SCSI command failed sanity checks.
.TP
.B 98
the \fIDEVICE\fR reports it has a check condition but the error
doesn't fit into any of the above categories.
.TP
.B 99
any errors that can't be categorized into values 1 to 98 may yield
this value. This includes transport and operating system errors
after the command has been sent to the device.
.PP
Most of the error conditions reported above will be repeatable (an
example of one that is not is "unit attention") so the utility can
be run again with the \fI\-v\fR option (or several) to obtain more
information.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2005\-2007 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B hdparm(hdparm),
.B sg_modes, sg_wr_mode, sginfo, sg_inq, sg_vpd(all in sg3_utils),
.B smartmontools(smartmontools.sourceforge.net), mt, eject(eject),
