.TH BGPD 8 "July 2000" "Zebra Beast - BGPD" "Version 0.88"

.SH NAME
bgpd \- a BGPv4, BGPv4+, BGPv4- routing engine for use with Zebra

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bgpd
[
.B \-dhpPv
]
[
.B \-f config-file
]
[
.B \-i pid-file
]
[
.B \-p bgp-port-number
]
[
.B \--bgp_port=port-number
]
[
.B \-P vty-port-number
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bgpd 
is a routing component that works with the 
.B zebra
routing engine.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Runs in daemon mode, forking and exiting from tty.

.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-config-file \fR\fIconfig-file\fR 
Specifies the config file to use for startup. If not specified this
option will likely default to \fB\fI/usr/local/etc/bgpd.conf\fR.

.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
A brief message.

.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-pid_file \fR\fIpid-file\fR
When bgpd starts its process idenifier is written to
\fB\fIpid-file\fR.  The init system uses the recorded PID to stop or
restart bgpd.  The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/bgpd.pid\fR.

.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-bgp_port=\fR\fIport\fR
Set the port that bgpd will listen to for bgp data.  

.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-vty_port \fR\fIport-number\fR 
Specify the port that the bgpd VTY will listen on. This defaults to
2605, as specified in \fI/etc/services\fR.

.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-retain\fR 
When the program terminates, retain routes added by \fBbgpd\fR.

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version and exit.


.SH COMMANDS

\fB router zebra \fR -- (Move routes into kernel table)
\fB router bgp [AS-NUMBER] \fR

\fB bgp router-id [BGP-ROUTER-ID] \fR

\fB network [NETWORK] area [BGP-AREA-ID] \fR
\fB no network [NETWORK] \fR

\fB aggregate-address [NETWORK] \fR

\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] remote-as [REMOTE-AS] \fR
\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] version [ 4 | 4+ | 4- ] \fR

\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] description \fR
\fB no neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] description \fR

\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] route-map [in | out] \fR
\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] distribute-list [in | out] \fR
\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] next-hop-self \fR
\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] weight [WEIGHT] \fR
\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] default-originate \fR
\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] ebgp-multihop \fR

\fB neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] shutdown \fR
\fB no neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] shutdown \fR

\fB clear ip bgp [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] \fR

\fB show ip bgp [NETWORK] \fR
\fB show ip bgp reg-exp [AS-REGEXP] \fR
\fB show ip bgp summary \fR
\fB show ip bgp neighbor [PEER-IP-ADDRESS] \fR
\fB show ip bgp route \fR

\fB show debug \fR

\fB debug bgp \fR
\fB debug event \fR
\fB debug update \fR
\fB debug keepalive \fR

\fB no debug event \fR
\fB no debug update \fR
\fB no debug keepalive \fR


.SH FILES

.TP
.BI /usr/local/sbin/bgpd
The default location of the 
.B bgpd
binary.

.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/bgpd.conf
The default location of the 
.B bgpd
config file.

.TP
.BI $(PWD)/bgpd.log 
If the 
.B bgpd
process is config'd to output logs to a file, then you will find this
file in the directory where you started \fBbgpd\fR.


.SH WARNING
This man page is intended as a quick reference for command line
options, and for config file commands. The definitive document is the
Info file \fBzebra\fR.


.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The bgpd process may log to standard output, to a VTY, to a log
file, or through syslog to the system logs. \fBbgpd\fR supports many
debugging options, see the Info file, or the source for details.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
References to other related man pages:

ripd(8), ripngd(8), ospfd(8), ospf6d(8), zebra(8), vtysh(1)


.SH BUGS
.B bgpd
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try 
.BI <bug-zebra@gnu.org>


.SH AUTHOR[S]
See <\fBwww.zebra.org\fR>, or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.

