.TH OSPF6D 8 "July 2000" "Zebra Beast - OSPF6D" "Version 0.88"

.SH NAME
ospf6d \- an OSPF routing engine for use with Zebra and IPv6

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ospf6d
[
.B \-dhv
]
[
.B \-f config-file
]
[
.B \-i pid-file
]
[
.B \-P port-number
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ospf6d 
is a routing component that works with the 
.B zebra
routing engine.
\fBospf6d\fR. 


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Runs in daemon mode, forking and exiting from tty.

.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-config-file \fR\fIconfig-file\fR 
Specifies the config file to use for startup. If not specified this
option will likely default to \fB\fI/usr/local/etc/ospf6d.conf\fR.
 
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
A brief message.

.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-pid_file \fR\fIpid-file\fR
When ospf6d starts its process idenifier is written to
\fB\fIpid-file\fR.  The init system uses the recorded PID to stop or
restart ospf6d.  The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/ospf6d.pid\fR.

.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-vty_port \fR\fIport-number\fR 
Specify the port that the ospf6d VTY will listen on. This defaults to
2606, as specified in \fB\fI/etc/services\fR.

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version and exit.


.SH COMMANDS

\fB router ospf6 \fR
\fB router zebra \fR -- (Move routes into kernel table)

\fB network [NETWORK] area [OSPF6-AREA-ID] \fR
\fB no network [NETWORK] \fR

\fB show ip ospf6 interface \fR
\fB show ip ospf6 neighbor \fR
\fB show ip ospf6 database \fR
\fB show ip ospf6 route \fR

\fB debug ospf6 ism \fR
\fB debug ospf6 packet \fR
\fB debug ospf6 nsm \fR



.SH FILES

.TP
.BI /usr/local/sbin/ospf6d
The default location of the 
.B ospf6d
binary.

.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/ospf6d.conf
The default location of the 
.B ospf6d
config file.

.TP
.BI $(PWD)/ospf6d.log 
If the 
.B ospf6d
process is config'd to output logs to a file, then you will find this
file in the directory where you started \fBospf6d\fR.


.SH WARNING
This man page is intended as a quick reference for command line
options, and for config file commands. The definitive document is the
Info file \fBzebra\fR.


.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The ospf6d process may log to standard output, to a VTY, to a log
file, or through syslog to the system logs. \fBospf6d\fR supports many
debugging options, see the Info file, or the source for details.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
References to other related man pages:

ripd(8), ripngd(8), ospfd(8), bgpd(8), zebra(8), vtysh(1)


.SH BUGS
.B ospf6d
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try 
.BI <bug-zebra@gnu.org>


.SH AUTHOR[S]
See <\fBwww.zebra.org\fR>, or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.

