.TH OSPFD 8 "July 2000" "Zebra Beast - OSPFD" "Version 0.88"

.SH NAME
ospfd \- an OSPF v2 routing engine for use with Zebra

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ospfd
[
.B \-dhlv
]
[
.B \-f config-file
]
[
.B \-i pid-file
]
[
.B \-P port-number
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ospfd 
is a routing component that works with the 
.B zebra
routing engine.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Runs in daemon mode, forking and exiting from tty.

.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-config-file \fR\fIconfig-file\fR 
Specifies the config file to use for startup. If not specified this
option will likely default to \fB\fI/usr/local/etc/ospfd.conf\fR.
 
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
A brief message.

.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-pid_file \fR\fIpid-file\fR
When ospfd starts its process idenifier is written to
\fB\fIpid-file\fR.  The init system uses the recorded PID to stop or
restart ospfd.  The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/ospfd.pid\fR.

.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-log_mode\fR
Turn verbose logging on.

.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-vty_port \fR\fIport-number\fR 
Specify the port that the ospfd VTY will listen on. This defaults to
2604, as specified in \fB\fI/etc/services\fR.

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version and exit.


.SH COMMANDS

\fB router ospf \fR
\fB router zebra \fR -- (Move routes into kernel table)

\fB network [NETWORK] area [OSPF-AREA-ID] \fR
\fB no network [NETWORK] \fR

\fB show ip ospf interface \fR
\fB show ip ospf neighbor \fR
\fB show ip ospf database \fR
\fB show ip ospf route \fR


\fB debug ospf ism \fR
\fB debug ospf packet \fR
\fB debug ospf nsm \fR



.SH FILES

.TP
.BI /usr/local/sbin/ospfd
The default location of the 
.B ospfd
binary.

.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/ospfd.conf
The default location of the 
.B ospfd
config file.

.TP
.BI $(PWD)/ospfd.log 
If the 
.B ospfd
process is config'd to output logs to a file, then you will find this
file in the directory where you started \fBospfd\fR.


.SH WARNING
This man page is intended as a quick reference for command line
options, and for config file commands. The definitive document is the
Info file \fBzebra\fR.


.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The ospfd process may log to standard output, to a VTY, to a log
file, or through syslog to the system logs. \fBospfd\fR supports many
debugging options, see the Info file, or the source for details.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
References to other related man pages:

ripd(8), ripngd(8), ospf6d(8), bgpd(8), zebra(8), vtysh(1)


.SH BUGS
.B ospfd
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try 
.BI <bug-zebra@gnu.org>


.SH AUTHOR[S]
See <\fBwww.zebra.org\fR>, or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.

