@node OSPFv3, BGP, OSPFv2, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter OSPFv3

@command{ospf6d} is a daemon support OSPF version 3 for IPv6 network.
OSPF for IPv6 is described in RFC2740.

@menu
* OSPF6 router::                
* OSPF6 area::                  
* OSPF6 interface::             
* Redistribute routes to OSPF6::  
* Showing OSPF6 information::   
@end menu

@node OSPF6 router, OSPF6 area, OSPFv3, OSPFv3
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section OSPF6 router

@deffn {Command} {router ospf6} {}
@end deffn

@deffn {OSPF6 Command} {router-id @var{a.b.c.d}} {}
Set router's Router-ID.
@end deffn

@deffn {OSPF6 Command} {interface @var{ifname} area @var{area}} {}
Bind interface to specified area, and start sending OSPF packets.  @var{area} can
be specified as 0.
@end deffn

@node OSPF6 area, OSPF6 interface, OSPF6 router, OSPFv3
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section OSPF6 area

Area support for OSPFv3 is not yet implemented.

@node OSPF6 interface, Redistribute routes to OSPF6, OSPF6 area, OSPFv3
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section OSPF6 interface

@deffn {Interface Command} {ipv6 ospf6 cost COST} {}
Sets interface's output cost.  Default value is 1.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interface Command} {ipv6 ospf6 hello-interval HELLOINTERVAL} {}
Sets interface's Hello Interval.  Default 40
@end deffn

@deffn {Interface Command} {ipv6 ospf6 dead-interval DEADINTERVAL} {}
Sets interface's Router Dead Interval.  Default value is 40.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interface Command} {ipv6 ospf6 retransmit-interval RETRANSMITINTERVAL} {}
Sets interface's Rxmt Interval.  Default value is 5.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interface Command} {ipv6 ospf6 priority PRIORITY} {}
Sets interface's Router Priority.  Default value is 1.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interface Command} {ipv6 ospf6 transmit-delay TRANSMITDELAY} {}
Sets interface's Inf-Trans-Delay.  Default value is 1.
@end deffn

@node Redistribute routes to OSPF6, Showing OSPF6 information, OSPF6 interface, OSPFv3
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Redistribute routes to OSPF6

@deffn {OSPF6 Command} {redistribute static} {}
@deffnx {OSPF6 Command} {redistribute connected} {}
@deffnx {OSPF6 Command} {redistribute ripng} {}
@end deffn

@node Showing OSPF6 information,  , Redistribute routes to OSPF6, OSPFv3
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Showing OSPF6 information

@deffn {Command} {show ipv6 ospf6 [INSTANCE_ID]} {}
INSTANCE_ID is an optional OSPF instance ID. To see router ID and OSPF
instance ID, simply type "show ipv6 ospf6 <cr>".
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} {show ipv6 ospf6 database} {}
This command shows LSA database summary.  You can specify the type of LSA.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} {show ipv6 ospf6 interface} {}
To see OSPF interface configuration like costs.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} {show ipv6 ospf6 neighbor} {}
Shows state and chosen (Backup) DR of neighbor.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} {show ipv6 ospf6 request-list A.B.C.D} {}
Shows requestlist of neighbor.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} {show ipv6 route ospf6} {}
This command shows internal routing table.
@end deffn
