.TH RIPD 8 "July 2000" "Zebra" "Version 0.88"

.SH NAME
ripd \- a RIP routing engine for use with Zebra

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ripd
[
.B \-dhrv
]
[
.B \-f config-file
]
[
.B \-i pid-file
]
[
.B \-P port-number
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ripd 
is a routing component that supports the 
.B zebra
route engine.
.B ripd 
supports RIPv1, RIPv2, and so forth.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Runs in daemon mode, forking and exiting from tty.

.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-config-file \fR\fIconfig-file\fR
Specifies the config file to use for startup. If not specified this option will likely default to \fB\fI/usr/local/etc/ripd.conf\fR.
 
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
A brief message.

.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-pid_file \fR\fIpid-file\fR
When ripd starts its process idenifier is written to
\fB\fIpid-file\fR.  The init system uses the recorded PID to stop or
restart ripd.  The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/ripd.pid\fR.

.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-vty_port \fR\fIport-number\fR 
Specify the port that the ripd VTY will listen on. This defaults to
2602, as specified in \fB\fI/etc/services\fR.

.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-retain\fR 
When the program terminates, retain routes added by \fBripd\fR.

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version and exit.


.SH COMMANDS

\fB router rip \fR
\fB no router rip \fR

\fB rip version [1|2] \fR
\fB no rip version [1|2] \fR

\fB network [A.B.C.D/M] \fR
\fB no network [A.B.C.D/M] \fR

\fB network [IFNAME] \fR
\fB no network [IFNAME] \fR

\fB neighbor [A.B.C.D] \fR
\fB no neighbor [A.B.C.D] \fR

\fB redistribute kernel \fR
\fB redistribute kernel metric [METRIC]\fR
\fB redistribute kernel route-map [ROUTE-MAP]\fR
\fB no redistribute kernel \fR

\fB redistribute static \fR
\fB redistribute static metric [METRIC]\fR
\fB redistribute static route-map [ROUTE-MAP]\fR
\fB no redistribute static \fR

\fB redistribute connected \fR
\fB redistribute connected metric [METRIC]\fR
\fB redistribute connected route-map [ROUTE-MAP]\fR
\fB no redistribute connected \fR

\fB redistribute ospf \fR
\fB redistribute ospf metric [METRIC]\fR
\fB redistribute ospf route-map [ROUTE-MAP]\fR
\fB no redistribute ospf \fR

\fB redistribute bgp \fR
\fB redistribute bgp metric [METRIC]\fR
\fB redistribute bgp route-map [ROUTE-MAP]\fR
\fB no redistribute bgp \fR

\fB route [A.B.C.D/M] \fR
\fB no route [A.B.C.D/M] \fR

\fB default-information originate \fR
\fB no default-information originate \fR

\fB default-metric [METRIC] \fR
\fB no default-metric [METRIC] \fR

\fB passive-interface [IFNAME] \fR
\fB no passive-interface [IFNAME] \fR

\fB offset-list [ACCESS-LIST] [in|out]\fR
\fB offset-list [ACCESS-LIST] [in|out] [IFNAME]\fR
\fB no offset-list [ACCESS-LIST] [in|out]\fR

\fB timers basic [UPDATE-INTERVAL] [INVALID] [TIMEOUT] [GARBAGE-COLLECT] \fR
\fB no timers basic \fR

\fB distribute-list [ACCESS-LIST] [in|out] [IFNAME] \fR
\fB no distribute-list [ACCESS-LIST] [in|out] [IFNAME] \fR

\fB distribute-list prefix [PREFIX-LIST] [in|out] [IFNAME] \fR
\fB no distribute-list prefix [PREFIX-LIST] [in|out] [IFNAME] \fR

\fB distance [DISTANCE] \fR
\fB no distance [DISTANCE] \fR

\fB distance [DISTANCE] [A.B.C.D/M] \fR
\fB no distance [DISTANCE] [A.B.C.D/M] \fR

\fB distance [DISTANCE] [A.B.C.D/M] [ACCESS-LIST]\fR
\fB no distance [DISTANCE] [A.B.C.D/M] [ACCESS-LIST]\fR

\fB ip rip send version [VERSION] \fR
\fB no ip rip send version [VERSION] \fR
\fB ip rip receive version [VERSION] \fR
\fB no ip rip receive version [VERSION] \fR

\fB ip rip authentication mode [md5|text]\fR
\fB no ip rip authentication mode [md5|text]\fR

\fB ip rip authentication key-chain [KEY-CHAIN]\fR
\fB no ip rip authentication key-chain [KEY-CHAIN]\fR

\fB ip rip authentication string [STRING]\fR
\fB no ip rip authentication string [STRING]\fR

\fB ip spli-horizon\fR
\fB no ip spli-horizon\fR

\fB show ip rip \fR
\fB show ip protocols \fR
\fB show debugging rip \fR

\fB debug rip \fR
\fB debug rip events \fR
\fB debug rip packet \fR
\fB debug rip zebra \fR

.SH FILES

.TP
.BI /usr/local/sbin/ripd
The default location of the 
.B ripd
binary.

.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/ripd.conf
The default location of the 
.B ripd
config file.

.TP
.BI $(PWD)/ripd.log 
If the 
.B ripd
process is config'd to output logs to a file, then you will find this
file in the directory where you started \fBripd\fR.


.SH WARNING
This man page is intended as a quick reference for command line options, and for config file commands. The definitive document is the Info file \fBzebra\fR.


.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The ripd process may log to standard output, to a VTY, to a log file, or through syslog to the system logs. 
.B ripd
supports many debugging options, see the Info file, or the source for details.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
References to other related man pages:

ripngd(8), ospfd(8), ospf6d(8), bgpd(8), zebra(8)



.SH BUGS
.B ripd
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try 
.BI <bug-zebra@gnu.org>


.SH AUTHOR[S]
See <\fBwww.zebra.org\fR>, or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.
