.TH RIPNGD 8 "July 2000" "Zebra Beast - RIPNGD" "Version 0.88"

.SH NAME
ripngd \- a RIP routing engine for use with Zebra and IPv6

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ripngd
[
.B \-dhlrv
]
[
.B \-f config-file
]
[
.B \-i pid-file
]
[
.B \-P port-number
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ripngd 
is a routing component that works with the 
.B zebra
routing engine.



.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Runs in daemon mode, forking and exiting from tty.

.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-config-file \fR\fIconfig-file\fR 
Specifies the config file to use for startup. If not specified this
option will likely default to \fB\fI/usr/local/etc/ripngd.conf\fR.
 
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
A brief message.

.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-pid_file \fR\fIpid-file\fR
When ripngd starts its process idenifier is written to
\fB\fIpid-file\fR.  The init system uses the recorded PID to stop or
restart ripngd.  The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/ripngd.pid\fR.

.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-log_mode\fR 
Turn verbose logging on.

.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-vty_port \fR\fIport-number\fR 
Specify the port that the ripngd VTY will listen on. This defaults to
2603, as specified in \fB\fI/etc/services\fR.

.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-retain\fR 
When the program terminates, retain routes added by \fBripd\fR.

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version and exit.


.SH COMMANDS

\fB router ripng \fR
\fB router zebra \fR -- (Move routes into kernel table)

\fB network [NETWORK] \fR
\fB no network [NETWORK] \fR

\fB network [IFNAME] \fR
\fB no network [IFNAME] \fR

\fB route [NETWORK] \fR
\fB no route [NETWORK] \fR

\fB flush_timer [FLUSH] \fR

\fB distribute-list [ACCESS-LIST] [in|out] [IFNAME] \fR

\fB show ip ripng \fR
\fB show debugging ripng \fR

\fB debug ripng \fR
\fB debug ripng events \fR
\fB debug ripng packet \fR
\fB debug ripng zebra \fR



.SH FILES

.TP
.BI /usr/local/sbin/ripngd
The default location of the 
.B ripngd
binary.

.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/ripngd.conf
The default location of the 
.B ripngd
config file.

.TP
.BI $(PWD)/ripngd.log 
If the 
.B ripngd
process is config'd to output logs to a file, then you will find this
file in the directory where you started \fBripngd\fR.


.SH WARNING
This man page is intended as a quick reference for command line
options, and for config file commands. The definitive document is the
Info file \fBzebra\fR.


.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The ripngd process may log to standard output, to a VTY, to a log
file, or through syslog to the system logs. \fBripngd\fR supports many
debugging options, see the Info file, or the source for details.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
References to other related man pages:

ripd(8), ospfd(8), ospf6d(8), bgpd(8), zebra(8), vtysh(1)

.SH BUGS
.B ripngd
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try 
.BI <bug-zebra@gnu.org>


.SH AUTHOR[S]
See <\fBwww.zebra.org\fR>, or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.

