.TH ZEBRA 8 "July 2000" "Zebra" "Version 0.88"

.SH NAME
zebra \- a routing manager for use with associated components

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zebra
[
.B \-bdhklrv
]
[
.B \-f config-file
]
[
.B \-i pid-file
]
[
.B \-P port-number
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zebra 
is a routing manager that implements the 
.B zebra
route engine.
.B zebra 
supports RIPv1, RIPv2, RIPng, OSPF, OSPF6, BGP4+, and BGP4-.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-batch\fR
Runs in batch mode, \fBzebra\fR parses its config and exits.

.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Runs in daemon mode, forking and exiting from tty.

.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-config-file \fR\fIconfig-file\fR
Specifies the config file to use for startup. If not specified this option will likely default to \fB\fI/usr/local/etc/zebra.conf\fR.
 
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
A brief message.

.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-pid_file \fR\fIpid-file\fR
When zebra starts its process idenifier is written to
\fB\fIpid-file\fR.  The init system uses the recorded PID to stop or
restart zebra.  The likely default is \fB\fI/var/run/zebra.pid\fR.

.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-keep_kernel\fR
On startup, don't delete self inserted routes.

.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-log_mode\fR
Turn verbose logging on.

.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-vty_port \fR\fIport-number\fR 
Specify the port that the zebra VTY will listen on. This defaults to
2602, as specified in \fB\fI/etc/services\fR.

.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-retain\fR 
When the program terminates, retain routes added by \fBzebra\fR.

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version and exit.


.SH COMMANDS

\fB table [TABLENO] \fR -- for use with multi-table kernels 

\fB ip route [NETWORK] [GATEWAY] \fR
\fB ipv6 route [NETWORK] [GATEWAY] \fR

\fB show ip route \fR
\fB show ipv6 route \fR
\fB show interface \fR
\fB show ipforward \fR
\fB show ipv6forward \fR

.TP
\fB interface [IFNAME] \fR
\fB shutdown \fR
\fB no shutdown \fR
\fB ip address [IP-ADDRESS] \fR
\fB description [DESCRIPTION] \fR
\fB multicast \fR
\fB no multicast \fR


.SH FILES

.TP
.BI /usr/local/sbin/zebra
The default location of the 
.B zebra
binary.

.TP
.BI /usr/local/etc/zebra.conf
The default location of the 
.B zebra
config file.

.TP
.BI $(PWD)/zebra.log 
If the 
.B zebra
process is config'd to output logs to a file, then you will find this
file in the directory where you started \fBzebra\fR.


.SH WARNING
This man page is intended as a quick reference for command line options, and for config file commands. The definitive document is the Info file \fBzebra\fR.


.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The zebra process may log to standard output, to a VTY, to a log file, or through syslog to the system logs. 
.B zebra
supports many debugging options, see the Info file, or the source for details.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
References to other related man pages:

ripngd(8), ospfd(8), ospf6d(8), bgpd(8), zebra(8), vtysh(1)



.SH BUGS
.B zebra
eats bugs for breakfast. If you have food for the maintainers try 
.BI <bug-zebra@gnu.org>


.SH AUTHOR[S]
See <\fBwww.zebra.org\fR>, or the Info file for an accurate list of authors.

