
		CDU31A/CDU33A Driver Info
		-------------------------

Information on the Sony CDU31A/CDU33A CDROM driver for the Linux
kernel.

   Corey Minyard (minyard@metronet.com)
  
   Colossians 3:17

Crude Table of Contents
-----------------------

  Setting Up the Hardware
  Configuring the Kernel
  Configuring as a Module
  Driver Special Features

  
This device driver handles Sony CDU31A/CDU33A CDROM drives and
provides a complete block-level interface as well as an ioctl()
interface as specified in include/linux/cdrom.h).  With this
interface, CDROMs can be accessed, standard audio CDs can be played
back normally, and CD audio information can be read off the drive.

Note that this will only work for CDU31A/CDU33A drives.  Some vendors
market their drives as CDU31A compatible.  They lie.  Their drives are
really CDU31A hardware interface compatible (they can plug into the
same card).  They are not software compatible.

Setting Up the Hardware
-----------------------

The CDU31A driver is unable to safely tell if an interface card is
present that it can use because the interface card does not announce
its presence in any way besides placing 4 I/O locations in memory.  It
used to just probe memory and attempt commands, but Linus wisely asked
me to remove that because it could really screw up other hardware in
the system.

Because of this, you must tell the kernel where the drive interface
is, what interrupts are used, and possibly if you are on a PAS-16
soundcard.

If you have the Sony CDU31A/CDU33A drive interface card, the following
diagram will help you set it up.  If you have another card, you are on
your own.  You need to make sure that the I/O address and interrupt is
not used by another card in the system.  You will need to know the I/O
address and interrupt you have set.  Note that use of interrupts is
highly recommended, if possible, it really cuts down on CPU used.
Unfortunately, most soundcards do not support interrupts for their
CDROM interfaces.  By default, the Sony interface card comes with
interrupts disabled.
   
        +----------+-----------------+----------------------+
        |  JP1     |  34 Pin Conn    |                      |
        |  JP2     +-----------------+                      |
        |  JP3                                              |
        |  JP4                                              |
        |                                                   +--+
        |                                                   |  +-+
        |                                                   |  | |  External
        |                                                   |  | |  Connector
        |                                                   |  | |
        |                                                   |  +-+
        |                                                   +--+
        |                                                   |
        |                                          +--------+
        |                                          |
        +------------------------------------------+
   
      JP1 sets the Base Address, using the following settings:
   
        Address         Pin 1           Pin 2
        -------         -----           -----
        0x320           Short           Short
        0x330           Short           Open
        0x340           Open            Short
        0x360           Open            Open
   
      JP2 and JP3 configure the DMA channel; they must be set the same.
   
        DMA             Pin 1           Pin 2           Pin 3
        ---             -----           -----           -----
        1               On              Off             On
        2               Off             On              Off
        3               Off             Off             On
   
      JP4 Configures the IRQ:
   
        IRQ     Pin 1           Pin 2           Pin 3           Pin 4
        ---     -----           -----           -----           -----
        3       Off             Off             On              Off
        4       Off             Off*            Off             On
        5       On              Off             Off             Off
        6       Off             On              Off             Off
   
                  The documentation states to set this for interrupt
                  4, but I think that is a mistake.

Note that if you have another interface card, you will need to look at
the documentation to find the I/O base address.  This is specified to
the SLCD.SYS driver for DOS with the /B: parameter, so you can look at
you DOS driver setup to find the address, if necessary.

Configuring the Kernel
----------------------

You must tell the kernel where the drive is at boot time.  This can be
done at the Linux boot prompt, by using LILO, or by using Bootlin.
Note that this is no substitute for HOWTOs and LILO documentation, if
you are confused please read those for info on bootline configuration
and LILO.

At the linux boot prompt, press the ALT key and add the following line
after the boot name (you can let the kernel boot, it will tell you the
default boot name while booting):

	cdu31a=<base address>,<interrupt>[,PAS]

The base address needs to have "0x" in front of it, since it is in
hex.  For instance, to configure a drive at address 320 on interrupt 5,
use the following:

	cdu31a=0x320,5

I use the following boot line:

	cdu31a=0x1f88,0,PAS

because I have a PAS-16 which does not support interrupt for the
CDU31A interface.

Adding this as an append line at the beginning of the /etc/lilo.conf
file will set it for lilo configurations.  I have the following as the
first line in my lilo.conf file:

	append="cdu31a=0x1f88,0"

I'm not sure how to set up Bootlin (I have never used it), if someone
would like to fill in this section please do.


Configuring as a Module
-----------------------

The driver supports loading as a module.  However, you must specify
the boot address and interrupt on the boot line to insmod.  You can't
use modprobe to load it, since modprobe doesn't support setting
variables.

Anyway, I use the following line to load my driver as a module

  /sbin/insmod /lib/modules/`uname -r`/misc/cdu31a.o cdu31a_port=0x1f88

You can set the following variables in the driver:

  cdu31a_port=<I/O address> - sets the base I/O.  If hex, put 0x in
			      front of it.  This must be specified.

  cdu31a_irq=<interrupt> - Sets the interrupt number.  Leaving this
			   off will turn interrupts off.


Driver Special Features
-----------------------

This section describes features beyond the normal audio and CD-ROM
functions of the drive.

2048 byte buffer mode

If a disk is mounted with -o block=2048, data is copied straight from
the drive data port to the buffer.  Otherwise, the readahead buffer
must be involved to hold the other 1K of data when a 1K block
operation is done.  Note that with 2048 byte blocks you cannot execute
files from the CD.

XA compatibility

The driver should support XA disks for both the CDU31A and CDU33A.  It
does this transparently, the using program doesn't need to set it.

Multi-Session

A multi-session disk looks just like a normal disk to the user.  Just
mount one normally, and all the data should be there.  A special
thanks to Koen for help with this!

Raw sector I/O

Using the CDROMREADAUDIO it is possible to read raw audio and data
tracks.  Both operations return 2352 bytes per sector.  On the data
tracks, the first 12 bytes is not returned by the drive and the value
of that data is indeterminate.
