.\"
.\" nfsd(8)
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1999 Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de>
.TH rpc.nfsd 8 "7 Aug 2006"
.SH NAME
rpc.nfsd \- NFS server process
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "/usr/sbin/rpc.nfsd [" options "]" " "nproc
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B rpc.nfsd
program implements the user level part of the NFS service. The
main functionality is handled by the
.B nfsd
kernel module; the user space program merely starts the specified
number of kernel threads.
.P
The
.B rpc.mountd
server provides an ancillary service needed to satisfy mount requests
by NFS clients.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-H " or " \-\-host  hostname
specify a particular hostname (or address) that NFS requests will
be accepted on. By default,
.B rpc.nfsd
will accept NFS requests on all known network addresses.
Note that
.B lockd
(which performs file locking services for NFS) may still accept
request on all known network addresses.  This may change in future
releases of the Linux Kernel.
.TP
.B \-p " or " \-\-port  port
specify a diferent port to listen on for NFS requests. By default,
.B rpc.nfsd
will listen on port 2049.
.TP
.B \-N " or " \-\-no-nfs-version vers
This option can be used to request that 
.B rpc.nfsd
does not offer certain versions of NFS. The current version of
.B rpc.nfsd
can support both NFS version 2,3 and the newer version 4.
.TP
.B \-T " or " \-\-no-tcp
Disable 
.B rpc.nfsd 
from accepting TCP connections from clients.
.TP
.B \-U " or " \-\-no-udp
Disable
.B rpc.nfsd
from accepting UDP connections from clients.
.TP
.I nproc
specify the number of NFS server threads. By default, just one
thread is started. However, for optimum performance several threads
should be used. The actual figure depends on the number of and the work
load created by the NFS clients, but a useful starting point is
8 threads. Effects of modifying that number can be checked using
the
.BR nfsstat (8)
program.
.P
Note that if the NFS server is already running, then the options for
specifying host, port, and protocol will be ignored.  The number of
processes given will be the only option considered, and the number of
active
.B nfsd
processes will be increased or decreased to match this number.
In particular
.B rpc.nfsd 0
will stop all threads and thus close any open connections.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rpc.mountd (8),
.BR exports (5),
.BR exportfs (8),
.BR rpc.rquotad (8),
.BR nfsstat (8).
.SH AUTHOR
Olaf Kirch, Bill Hawes, H. J. Lu, G. Allan Morris III,
and a host of others.
