.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Sougata Santra / Tuxera Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2011-2012 Erik Larsson / Tuxera Inc.
.\"
.TH FATFSCK 8 "March 2014" "Tuxera TFATprogs 3014.9.11"
.SH NAME
fatfsck \- check and repair a FAT volume
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fatfsck
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fatfsck
will check a FAT volume for errors, and optionally correct them.
Run fatfsck without arguments for a full list of options.
.SH OPTIONS
Below is a summary of all the options that
.B fatfsck
accepts.  Nearly all options have two equivalent names.  The short name is
preceded by
.B \-
and the long name is preceded by
.BR \-\- .
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-basic\fR
Do only a basic file system check or repair. This option limits fatfsck to
checking/repairing the boot region, FAT and the root directory. All other
directories and allocations are ignored. This is useful when you want to do a
fast check/repair which makes sure that the volume will mount properly and that
the root directory will be accessible.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-probe\fR
Probe for a FAT file system. This runs some tests on the device to check if
the file system is FAT.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Suppresses informational messages. Only error/warning messages and the final
summary is displayed during execution.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-repair\fR
Repair on-disk inconsistencies encountered. 
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-automatic\-repair\fR
If the volume is marked dirty, then repair on-disk inconsistencies encountered (equivalent to
the \fB\-r\fR/\fB\-\-repair\fR option). Otherwise exit immediately with no action.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-strict\fR
Turns on strict checking. This includes checking things that are not normally
required to make sure the volume follows FAT specifications. This may increase
the execution time for fatfsck.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-timeout\fR SECONDS
Timeout in seconds before fatfsck will abort the volume check/repair. If
specified, this sets an upper limit on the execution time of fatfsck. After the
timeout occurs, fatfsck will clear all its pending tasks and return as soon as
possible.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Verbose output. This makes fatfsck print more information about what it's doing,
for instance which directory/file it's currently processing.
.SH EXIT STATUS
\fB0\fR: Success. \fBfatfsck\fR did what it was instructed to do successfully.
.TP
\fB1\fR: Unknown error. Error came from outside \fBfatfsck\fR (libraries, operating system kernel, ...).
.TP
\fB2\fR: Invalid arguments. An error was detected when parsing the options.
.TP
\fB3\fR: FAT volume errors were detected (when checking) or could not be repaired (when repairing)
.SH BUGS
If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to
fat-support@tuxera.com.
.hy
.SH AUTHORS
.B fatfsck
was written by Sougata Santra, Tuxera Inc.
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B fatfsck
is part of the
.B Tuxera FATprogs
package.
