.\" *************************************************************************
.\" *  Copyright © 2006 Rémi Denis-Courmont.                                *
.\" *  This program is free software: you can redistribute and/or modify    *
.\" *  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by *
.\" *  the Free Software Foundation, versions 2 or 3 of the license.        *
.\" *                                                                       *
.\" *  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,      *
.\" *  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of       *
.\" *  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the        *
.\" *  GNU General Public License for more details.                         *
.\" *                                                                       *
.\" *  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License    *
.\" *  along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>. *
.\" *************************************************************************
.TH "ADDR2NAME" "1" "$Date: 2010-10-31 22:56:30 +0200 (dim. 31 oct. 2010) $" "addr2name" "User's Manual"
.SH NAME
addr2name, name2addr \- perform DNS lookups from scripts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "addr2name" " [" "-46cmnr" "] [" "HOSTNAMES" "]"

.BR "name2addr" " [" "-46cn" "] [" "HOSTNAMES" "]"

.SH DESCRIPTON
Write addresses or canonical hostname of specified names to the standard
output. If no names are specified via the command line, they are read from
the standard input.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BR "\-4" " or " "\-\-ipv4"
Only try to perform IPv4 lookups.

.TP
.BR "\-6" " or " "\-\-ipv6"
Only try to perform IPv6 lookups.

.TP
.BR "\-c" " or " "\-\-config"
Only lookup and print results for address families that match locally
configured addresses (If the system has no IPv4 resp IPv6 address,
then IPv4 resp IPv6 addresses are ignored).

.TP
.BR "\-h" " or " "\-\-help"
Display some help and exit.

.TP
.BR "\-m" " or " "\-\-multiple"
Normally, if a name yields multiple results, only the first one is printed.
With this optional parameter, all results will be printed on a single line,
separated by spaces.

.TP
.BR "\-n" " or " "\-\-numeric"
Prevent forward hostname lookup.
This ensures that the input names are numeric addresses, which do not need
to be looked up. Typically used along with the \-\-reverse option to convert
numerical addresses to canonical hostnames.

.TP
.BR "\-r" " or " "\-\-reverse"
Perform a reverse DNS lookup
.RB "(enabled implicitly with " "addr2name" ")."
.BR "addr2name" " prints numerical resolved addresses by default instead."

.TP
.BR "\-\-version"
Display program version and license and exit.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
host(1), getaddrinfo(3), getnameinfo(3), resolv.conf(5)

.SH AUTHOR
R\[char233]mi Denis-Courmont <remi at remlab dot net>

$Id: addr2name.1 658 2010-10-31 20:56:30Z remi $

http://www.remlab.net/ndisc6/
