.\" *************************************************************************
.\" *  Copyright © 2006 Rémi Denis-Courmont.                                *
.\" *  This program is free software: you can redistribute and/or modify    *
.\" *  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by *
.\" *  the Free Software Foundation, versions 2 or 3 of the license.        *
.\" *                                                                       *
.\" *  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,      *
.\" *  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of       *
.\" *  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the        *
.\" *  GNU General Public License for more details.                         *
.\" *                                                                       *
.\" *  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License    *
.\" *  along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>. *
.\" *************************************************************************
.TH "DNSSORT" "1" "$Date: 2010-10-31 22:56:30 +0200 (dim. 31 oct. 2010) $" "dnssort" "User's Manual"
.SH NAME
dnssort \- sort DNS hostnames
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "dnssort" " [" "-r" "] [" "FILES" "]"

.SH DESCRIPTON
Write sorted concatenation of all specified files to standard output.
If none are specified, the standard input is used.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BR "\-\-help"
Display some help and exit.

.TP
.BR "\-r"
Reverse the sorting comparisons.

.TP
.BR "\-\-version"
Display program version and license and exit.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
sort(1)

.SH AUTHOR
R\[char233]mi Denis-Courmont <remi at remlab dot net>

$Id: dnssort.1 658 2010-10-31 20:56:30Z remi $

http://www.remlab.net/ndisc6/
