.\" Copyright (C) 2002, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" This document is dual-licensed.  You may distribute and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of either of the following licenses:
.\"
.\" * The GNU General Public License, as published by the Free Software
.\"   Foundation, version 3 or (at your option) any later version.  You
.\"   should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"   along with this program.  If not, see
.\"   <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" * The GNU Free Documentation License, as published by the Free
.\"   Software Foundation, version 1.2 or (at your option) any later
.\"   version, with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no
.\"   Back-Cover Texts.  You should have received a copy of the GNU Free
.\"   Documentation License along with this program.  If not, see
.\"   <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH RNANO 1 "version 2.8.0" "March 2017"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.

.SH NAME
rnano \- a restricted nano

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rnano
.RI [ options "] [[+" line [, column "]]\ " file "]..."

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrnano\fR runs the \fBnano\fR editor in restricted mode.  This allows
editing only the specified file or files, and doesn't allow the user
access to the filesystem nor to a command shell.
.PP
In restricted mode, \fBnano\fR will:
.IP \[bu] 2
not read any nanorc files;
.IP \[bu]
not allow suspending;
.IP \[bu]
not read nor write any file not specified on the command line;
.IP \[bu]
not allow saving a file under a different name;
.IP \[bu]
not allow appending or prepending to any file;
.IP \[bu]
not make backup files nor do spell checking.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a summary of command-line options and exit.
.PP
See the \fBnano\fP(1) manpage for all available options.

.SH BUGS
Please report bugs via \fIhttps://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=nano\fR.

.SH HOMEPAGE
https://nano-editor.org/

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nano (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Chris Allegretta and others (see the files \fIAUTHORS\fR and \fITHANKS\fR
for details).  This manual page was originally written by Thijs Kinkhorst
for the Debian system (but may be used by others).
