include include/asm-generic/Kbuild.asm

header-y += auxvec.h
header-y += ioctls.h
header-y += mman.h
header-y += sembuf.h
header-y += siginfo.h
header-y += stat.h
header-y += errno.h
header-y += ipcbuf.h
header-y += msgbuf.h
header-y += shmbuf.h
header-y += socket.h
header-y += termbits.h
header-y += fcntl.h
header-y += ipc.h
header-y += poll.h
header-y += shmparam.h
header-y += sockios.h
header-y += ucontext.h
header-y += ioctl.h
header-y += linkage.h
header-y += resource.h
header-y += sigcontext.h
header-y += statfs.h
header-y += ps3fb.h

unifdef-y += a.out.h
unifdef-y += asm-compat.h
unifdef-y += bootx.h
unifdef-y += byteorder.h
unifdef-y += cputable.h
unifdef-y += elf.h
unifdef-y += nvram.h
unifdef-y += param.h
unifdef-y += posix_types.h
unifdef-y += ptrace.h
unifdef-y += seccomp.h
unifdef-y += signal.h
unifdef-y += spu_info.h
unifdef-y += termios.h
unifdef-y += types.h
unifdef-y += unistd.h
